---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 29
---

In every affair consider what precedes and follows, and then undertake it.
Otherwise you will begin with spirit; but not having thought of the
consequences, when some of them appear you will shamefully desist.  "I would
conquer at the Olympic games." But consider what precedes and follows, and
then, if it is for your advantage, engage in the affair. You must conform to
rules, submit to a diet, refrain from dainties; exercise your body, whether you
choose it or not, at a stated hour, in heat and cold; you must drink no cold
water, nor sometimes even wine. In a word, you must give yourself up to your
master, as to a physician. Then, in the combat, you may be thrown into a ditch,
dislocate your arm, turn your ankle, swallow dust, be whipped, and, after all,
lose the victory. When you have evaluated all this, ifr having viewed the whole
matter on all sides, or made any scrutiny into it, but rashly, and with a cold
inclination. Thus some, when they have seen a philosopher and heard a man
speaking like Euphrates (though, indeed, who can speak like him?), have a mind
to be philosophers too.  Consider first, man, what the matter is, and what your
own nature is able to bear. If you would be a wrestler, consider your
shoulders, your back, your thighs; for different persons are made for different
things. Do you think that you can act as you do, and be a philosopher?  That
you can eat and drink, and be angry and discontented as you are now? You must
watch, you must labor, you must get the better of certain appetites, must quit
your acquaintance, be despised by your servant, be laughed at by those you
meet; come off worse than others in everything, in magistracies, in honors, in
courts of judicature. When you have considered all these things round,
approach, if you please; if, by parting with them, you have a mind to purchase
apathy, freedom, and tranquillity. If not, don't come here; don't, like
children, be one while a philosopher, then a publican, then an orator, and then
one of Caesar's officers. These things are not consistent. You must be one man,
either good or bad. You must cultivate either your own ruling faculty or
externals, and apply yourself either to things within or without you; that is,
be either a philosopher, or one of the vulgar.


