---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Rolleston  
Date:       1881  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/rolleston.htm
Code:       twr  
Chapter: 29
---
##  29

Of every work you take in hand to do, mark well the conditions and the
consequences, and so enter upon it. For if you do not this, you will at first
set out eagerly, not regarding what is to follow, but in the end thereof, if
any difficulties have arisen, you will leave it off with shame.

So you wish to conquer in the Olympic games, my friend? And I too, by the Gods,
and a fine thing it would be! But first mark the conditions and the
consequences, and then set to work. You will have to put yourself under
discipline; to eat by rule; to avoid cakes and sweetmeats; to take exercise at
the appointed hour whether you like it or no, in cold and heat; to abstain from
cold drinks and from wine at your will; in a word, to give yourself over to the
trainer as to a physician. Then in the conflict itself you are likely enough to
dislocate your wrist or twist your ankle, to swallow a great deal of dust, to
be severely thrashed, and, after all these things, to be defeated.

If, having considered these circumstances, you are still in the mind to enter
for the Olympic prize, then do so. But without consideration, you will turn
from one thing to another like a child, who now plays the wrestler, now the
flute player, now the gladiator, then sounds the bugle call, or declaims
like an actor; and so you too will be first an athlete, then a gladiator,
then an orator, then a philosopher, and nothing with your whole soul; but
as an ape you will mimic every sight you see, and flatter yourself with one
thing after another. For you approached nothing with consideration, nor
with systematic diligence, but lightly, and with but a cold desire.

And thus some men, after having seen a philosopher and heard discourse like
that of Euphrates (yet who indeed can say that any discourse is like his?)
desire that they also may become philosophers.

But O man —  first consider what it really is that you are desiring to do, and
then inquire of your own nature, whether you have power to support the
undertaking. Do you desire to become a pentathlos or a wrestler? Then scan
your arms and your thighs and try the strength of your loins. For nature endows
different men with different capacities.

And do you think that you can be a sage and at the same time continue to eat
and drink and indulge your desires and be fastidious, just as before? Nay
verily, for you must watch and labour, and withdraw yourself from your
household and be despised by any serving-boy and be ridiculed by your
neighbors, and you must take an inferior position in all things, in reputation,
in authority, in courts of justice, in dealings of every kind.

Consider these things; whether you are willing at such a price to gain
serenity, freedom, and immunity from vexation. And if not, renounce that aim at
once, and do not like a child at play be now for a little a philosopher, then a
tax-gatherer, then a public speaker, then a procurator of the Empire.  For
these things do not agree among themselves, and, good or bad, it behoves you to
be one man. You must either cultivate external things or your own essential
part, you must show your skill in the management of either your outward or your
inward life — in short, you must take up the position either of a sensualist
or of a sage.


