---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Rolleston  
Date:       1881  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/rolleston.htm
Code:       twr  
Chapter: 51
---
##  51

How long will you still delay to hold yourself worthy of the best things, and
to transgress in nothing the defining word? You have accepted the maxims by
which you ought to live, and do you live by them? What teacher do you still
look for, to whom to hand over the task of your correction? You are no longer a
boy, but now a full grown man.  If, then,you are neglectful and indifferent,
and make delay after delay, and form purpose after purpose, and fix again and
again the days after which you will begin to attend to yourself, you will not
see that you are making no advance, but will be now and always a sensualist,
living and dying.

Therefore hold yourself worthy forthwith to live as a man of full age, and with
your foot on the path; and let whatever appears to you as the best be to you as
an inviolable law. And when anything is presented to you which involves toil,
or pleasure, or reputation or the loss of it, remember that now is the
conflict, here are the Olympic games, and you can put them off no longer; and
that in a single day and in a single trial ground is to be lost or gained.

It was thus that Socrates made himself what he was, on every occasion bringing
forward his true self, and never having regard to anything else than Reason,
And you, though you are not yet Socrates, yet as one who desires to be Socrates
so you ought to live.


