---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 24
---
##  24

Let not these reflections oppress you: "I shall live without honour, and be
nobody anywhere." For, if lack of honour is an evil, you cannot be in evil
through the instrumentality of some other person, any more than you can be in
shame. It is not your business, is it, to get office, or to be invited to a
dinner-party? Certainly not. How, then, can this be any longer a lack of
honour? And how is it that you will be "nobody anywhere," when you ought to be
somebody only in those things which are under your control, wherein you are
privileged to be a man of the very greatest honour? But your friends will be
without assistance? What do you mean by being "without assistance"? They will
not have paltry coin from you, and you will not make them Roman citizens. Well,
who told you that these are some of the matters under our control, and not
rather things which others do? And who is able to give another what he does not
himself have? "Get money, then," says some friend, "in order that we too may
have it." If I can get money and at the same time keep myself self-respecting,
and faithful, and high-minded, show me the way and I will get it. But if you
require me to lose the good things that belong to me, in order that you may
acquire the things that are not good, you can see for yourselves how unfair and
inconsiderate you are. And which do you really prefer? Money, or a faithful and
self-respecting friend? Help me, therefore, rather to this end, and do not
require me to do those things which will make me lose these qualities.

"But my country," says he, "so far as lies in me, will be without assistance."
Again I ask, what kind of assistance do you mean? It will not have loggias or
baths of your providing. And what does that signify? For neither does it have
shoes provided by the blacksmith, nor has it arms provided by the cobbler; but
it is sufficient if each man fulfil his own proper function. And if you secured
for it another faithful and self-respecting citizen, would you not be doing it
any good? "Yes." Very well, and then you also would not be useless to it. "What
place, then, shall I have in the State?" says he. Whatever place you can have,
and at the same time maintain the man of fidelity and self-respect that is in
you. But if, through your desire to help the State, you lose these qualities,
of what good would you become to it, when in the end you turned out to be
shameless and unfaithful?


