---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 25
---
##  25

Has someone been honoured above you at a dinner-party, or in salutation, or in
being called in to give advice? Now if these matters are good, you ought to be
happy that he got them; but if evil, be not distressed because you did not get
them; and bear in mind that, if you do not act the same way that others do,
with a view to getting things which are not under our control, you cannot be
considered worthy to receive an equal share with others. Why, how is it
possible for a person who does not haunt some man's door, to have equal shares
with the man who does? For the man who does not do escort duty, with the man
who does? For the man who does not praise, with the man who does? You will be
unjust, therefore, and insatiable, if, while refusing to pay the price for
which such things are bought, you want to obtain them for nothing. Well, what
is the price for heads of lettuce? An obol, perhaps. If, then, somebody gives
up his obol and gets his heads of lettuce, while you do not give your obol, and
do not get them, do not imagine that you are worse off than the man who gets
his lettuce. For as he has his heads of lettuce, so you have your obol which
you have not given away.

Now it is the same way also in life. You have not been invited to somebody's
dinner-party? Of course not; for you didn't give the host the price at which he
sells his dinner. He sells it for praise; he sells it for personal attention.
Give him the price, then, for which it is sold, if it is to your interest. But
if you wish both not to give up the one and yet to get the other, you are
insatiable and a simpleton. Have you, then, nothing in place of the dinner?
Indeed you have; you have not had to praise the man you did not want to praise;
you have not had to put up with the insolence of his doorkeepers.


