---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 29
---

In each separate thing that you do, consider the matters which come first and
those which follow after, and only then approach the thing itself. Otherwise,
at the start you will come to it enthusiastically, because you have never
reflected upon any of the subsequent steps, but later on, when some
difficulties appear, you will give up disgracefully. Do you wish to win an
Olympic victory? So do I, by the gods! for it is a fine thing. But consider the
matters which come before that, and those which follow after, and only when you
have done that, put your hand to the task. You have to submit to discipline,
follow a strict diet, give up sweet cakes, train under compulsion, at a fixed
hour, in heat or in cold; you must not drink cold water, nor wine just whenever
you feel like it; you must have turned yourself over to your trainer precisely
as you would to a physician. Then when the contest comes on, you have to "dig
in" beside your opponent, and sometimes dislocate your wrist, sprain your
ankle, swallow quantities of sand, sometimes take a scourging, and along with
all that get beaten. After you have considered all these points, go on into the
games, if you still wish to do so; otherwise, you will be turning back like
children. Sometimes they play wrestlers, again gladiators, again they blow
trumpets, and then act a play. So you too are now an athlete, now a gladiator,
then a rhetorician, then a philosopher, yet with your whole soul nothing; but
like an ape you imitate whatever you see, and one thing after another strikes
your fancy. For you have never gone out after anything with circumspection, nor
after you had examined it all over, but you act at haphazard and
half-heartedly.

In the same way, when some people have seen a philosopher and have heard
someone speaking like Euphrates (though, indeed, who can speak like him?), they
wish to be philosophers themselves. Man, consider first the nature of the
business, and then learn your own natural ability, if you are able to bear it.
Do you wish to be a contender in the pentathlon, or a wrestler? Look to your
arms, your thighs, see what your loins are like. For one man has a natural
talent for one thing, another for another. Do you suppose that you can eat in
the same fashion, drink in the same fashion, give way to impulse and to
irritation, just as you do now? You must keep vigils, work hard, abandon your
own people, be despised by a paltry slave, be laughed to scorn by those who
meet you, in everything get the worst of it, in honour, in office, in court, in
every paltry affair. Look these drawbacks over carefully, if you are willing at
the price of these things to secure tranquillity, freedom and calm. Otherwise,
do not approach philosophy; don't act like a child—now a philosopher, later on
a tax-gatherer, then a rhetorician, then a procurator of Caesar. These things
do not go together. You must be one person, either good or bad; you must labour
to improve either your own governing principle or externals; you must work hard
either on the inner man, or on things outside; that is, play either the rôle of
a philosopher or else that of a layman.


