---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 32
---

When you have recourse to divination, remember that you do not know what the
issue is going to be, but that you have come in order to find this out from the
diviner; yet if you are indeed a philosopher, you know, when you arrive, what
the nature of it is. For if it is one of the things which are not under our
control, it is altogether necessary that what is going to take place is neither
good nor evil. Do not, therefore, bring to the diviner desire or aversion, and
do not approach him with trembling, but having first made up your mind that
every issue is indifferent and nothing to you, but that, whatever it may be, it
will be possible for you to turn it to good use, and that no one will prevent
this. Go, then, with confidence to the gods as to counsellors; and after that,
when some counsel has been given you, remember whom you have taken as
counsellors, and whom you will be disregarding if you disobey. But go to
divination as Socrates thought that men should go, that is, in cases where the
whole inquiry has reference to the outcome, and where neither from reason nor
from any other technical art are means vouchsafed for discovering the matter in
question. Hence, when it is your duty to share the danger of a friend or of
your country, do not ask of the diviner whether you ought to share that danger.
For if the diviner forewarns you that the omens of sacrifice have been
unfavourable, it is clear that death is portended, or the injury of some member
of your body, or exile; yet reason requires that even at this risk you are to
stand by your friend, and share the danger with your country. Wherefore, give
heed to the greater diviner, the Pythian Apollo, who cast out of his temple the
man who had not helped his friend when he was being murdered.


