---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 33
---
##  33

Lay down for yourself, at the outset, a certain stamp and type of character for
yourself, which you are to maintain whether you are by yourself or are meeting
with people. And be silent for the most part, or else make only the most
necessary remarks, and express these in few words. But rarely, and when
occasion requires you to talk, talk, indeed, but about no ordinary topics. Do
not talk about gladiators, or horse-races, or athletes, or things to eat or
drink—topics that arise on all occasions; but above all, do not talk about
people, either blaming, or praising, or comparing them. If, then, you can, by
your own conversation bring over that of your companions to what is seemly. But
if you happen to be left alone in the presence of aliens, keep silence.

Do not laugh much, nor at many things, nor boisterously.

Refuse, if you can, to take an oath at all, but if that is impossible, refuse
as far as circumstances allow.

Avoid entertainments given by outsiders and by persons ignorant of philosophy;
but if an appropriate occasion arises for you to attend, be on the alert to
avoid lapsing into the behaviour of such laymen. For you may rest assured,
that, if a man's companion be dirty, the person who keeps close company with
him must of necessity get a share of his dirt, even though he himself happens
to be clean.

In things that pertain to the body take only as much as your bare need
requires, I mean such things as food, drink, clothing, shelter, and household
slaves; but cut down everything which is for outward show or luxury.

In your sex-life preserve purity, as far as you can, before marriage, and, if
you indulge, take only those privileges which are lawful. However, do not make
yourself offensive, or censorious, to those who do indulge, and do not make
frequent mention of the fact that you do not yourself indulge.

If someone brings you word that So-and-so is speaking ill of you, do not defend
yourself against what has been said, but answer, "Yes, indeed, for he did not
know the rest of the faults that attach to me; if he had, these would not have
been the only ones he mentioned."

It is not necessary, for the most part, to go to the public shows. If, however,
a suitable occasion ever arises, show that your principal concern is for none
other than yourself, which means, wish only for that to happen which does
happen, and for him only to win who does win; for so you will suffer no
hindrance. But refrain utterly from shouting, or laughter at anyone, or great
excitement. And after you have left, do not talk a great deal about what took
place, except in so far as it contributes to your own improvement; for such
behaviour indicates that the spectacle has aroused your admiration.

Do not go rashly or readily to people's public readings, but when you do go,
maintain your own dignity and gravity, and at the same time be careful not to
make yourself disagreeable.

When you are about to meet somebody, in particular when it is one of those men
who are held in very high esteem, propose to yourself the question, "What would
Socrates or Zeno have done under these circumstances?" and then you will not be
at a loss to make proper use of the occasion. When you go to see one of those
men who have great power, propose to yourself the thought, that you will not
find him at home, that you will be shut out, that the door will be slammed in
your face, that he will pay no attention to you. And if, despite all this, it
is your duty to go, go and take what comes, and never say to yourself, "It was
not worth all the trouble." For this is characteristic of the layman, that is,
a man who is vexed at externals.

In your conversation avoid making mention at great length and excessively of
your own deeds or dangers, because it is not as pleasant for others to hear
about your adventures, as it is for you to call to mind your own dangers.

Avoid also raising a laugh, for this is a kind of behaviour that slips easily
into vulgarity, and at the same time is calculated to lessen the respect which
your neighbours have of you. It is dangerous also to lapse into foul language.
When, therefore, anything of the sort occurs, if the occasion be suitable, go
even so far as to reprove the person who has made such a lapse; if, however,
the occasion does not arise, at all events show by keeping silence, and
blushing, and frowning, that you are displeased by what has been said.


