---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 51
---

How long will you still wait to think yourself worthy of the best things, and
in nothing to transgress against the distinctions set up by the reason? You
have received the philosophical principles which you ought to accept, and you
have accepted them. What sort of a teacher, then, do you still wait for, that
you should put off reforming yourself until he arrives? You are no longer a
lad, but already a full-grown man. If you are now neglectful and easy-going,
and always making one delay after another, and fixing first one day and then
another, after which you will pay attention to yourself, then without realizing
it you will make no progress, but, living and dying, will continue to be a
layman throughout. Make up your mind, therefore, before it is too late, that
the fitting thing for you to do is to live as a mature man who is making
progress, and let everything which seems to you to be best be for you a law
that must not be transgressed. And if you meet anything that is laborious, or
sweet, or held in high repute, or in no repute, remember that now is the
contest, and here before you are the Olympic games, and that it is impossible
to delay any longer, and that it depends on a single day and a single action,
whether progress is lost or saved. This is the way Socrates became what he was,
by paying attention to nothing but his reason in everything that he
encountered. And even if you are not yet a Socrates, still you ought to live as
one who wishes to be a Socrates.


