---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 1
---

There are things which are within our power, and there are things which are
beyond our power. Within our power are opinion, aim, desire, aversion, and, in
one word, whatever affairs are our own. Beyond our power are body, property,
reputation, office, and, in one word, whatever are not properly our own
affairs.

Now, the things within our power are by nature free, unrestricted, unhindered;
but those beyond our power are weak, dependent, restricted, alien. Remember,
then, that if you attribute freedom to things by nature dependent, and take
what belongs to others for your own, you will be hindered, you will lament, you
will be disturbed, you will find fault both with gods and men. But if you take
for your own only that which is your own, and view what belongs to others just
as it really is, then no one will ever compel you, no one will restrict you,
you will find fault with no one, you will accuse no one, you will do nothing
against your will; no one will hurt you, you will not have an enemy, nor will
you suffer any harm.

Aiming therefore at such great things, remember that you must not allow
yourself any inclination, however slight, towards the attainment of the others;
but that you must entirely quit some of them, and for the present postpone the
rest. But if you would have these, and possess power and wealth likewise, you
may miss the latter in seeking the former; and you will certainly fail of that
by which alone happiness and freedom are procured.

Seek at once, therefore, to be able to say to every unpleasing semblance, " You
are but a semblance and by no means the real thing." And then examine it by
those rules which you have; and first and chiefly, by this: whether it concerns
the things which are within our own power, or those which are not; and if it
concerns anything beyond our power, be prepared to say that it is nothing to
you.


