---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Encheiridion, or Manual  
Translator: William Abbott Oldfather  
Date:       1928  
Source: 
   label: en.wikisource.org
   url: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Epictetus,_the_Discourses_as_reported_by_Arrian,_the_Manual,_and_Fragments/Manual 
Code:       wao  
Chapter: 31
---

In piety towards the gods, I would have you know, the chief element is this, to
have right opinions about them—as existing and as administering the universe
well and justly—and to have set yourself to obey them and to submit to
everything that happens, and to follow it voluntarily, in the belief that it is
being fulfilled by the highest intelligence. For if you act in this way, you
will never blame the gods, nor find fault with them for neglecting you. But
this result cannot be secured in any other way than by withdrawing your idea of
the good and the evil from the things which are not under our control, and
placing it in those which are under our control, and in those alone. Because,
if you think any of those former things to be good or evil, then, when you fail
to get what you want and fall into what you do not want, it is altogether
inevitable that you will blame and hate those who are responsible for these
results. For this is the nature of every living creature, to flee from and to
turn aside from the things that appear harmful, and all that produces them, and
to pursue after and to admire the things that are helpful, and all that
produces them. Therefore, it is impossible for a man who thinks that he is
being hurt to take pleasure in that which he thinks is hurting him, just as it
is also impossible for him to take pleasure in the hurt itself. Hence it
follows that even a father is reviled by a son when he does not give his child
some share in the things that seem to be good; and this it was which made
Polyneices and Eteocles enemies of one another, the thought that the royal
power was a good thing. That is why the farmer reviles the gods, and so also
the sailor, and the merchant, and those who have lost their wives and their
children. For where a man's interest lies, there is also his piety. Wherefore,
whoever is careful to exercise desire and aversion as he should, is at the same
time careful also about piety. But it is always appropriate to make libations,
and sacrifices, and to give of the firstfruits after the manner of our fathers,
and to do all this with purity, and not in a slovenly or careless fashion, nor,
indeed, in a niggardly way, nor yet beyond our means.


