---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 25
---

Has some one had precedence of you at an entertainment or a levée or been
called in before you to give advice? If these things are good you ought to be
glad that he got them; if they are evil, do not be angry that you did not get
them yourself. Remember that if you want to get what is not in your power, you
cannot earn the same reward as others unless you act as they do. How is it
possible for one who does not haunt the great man's door to have equal shares
with one who does, or one who does not go in his train equality with one who
does; or one who does not praise him with one who does? You will be unjust then
and insatiable if you wish to get these privileges for nothing, without paying
their price. What is the price of a lettuce? An obol perhaps. If then a man
pays his obol and gets his lettuces, and you do not pay and do not get them, do
not think you are defrauded. For as he has the lettuces so you have the obol
you did not give. The same principle holds good too in conduct. You were not
invited to some one's entertainment? Because you did not give the host the
price for which he sells his dinner. He sells it for compliments, he sells it
for attentions. Pay him the price then, if it is to your profit. But if you
wish to get the one and yet not give up the other, nothing can satisfy you in
your folly.

What! you say, you have nothing instead of the dinner?

Nay, you have this, you have not praised the man you did not want to praise,
you have not had to bear with the insults of his doorstep.


