---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 32
---

When you make use of prophecy remember that while you know not what the issue
will be, but are come to learn it from the prophet, you do know before you come
what manner of thing it is, if you are really a philosopher. For if the event
is not in our control, it cannot be either good or evil. Therefore do not bring
with you to the prophet the will to get or the will to avoid, and do not
approach him with trembling, but with your mind made up, that the whole issue
is indifferent and does not affect you and that, whatever it be, it will be in
your power to make good use of it, and no one shall hinder this. With
confidence then approach the gods as counsellors, and further, when the counsel
is given you, remember whose counsel it is, and whom you will be disregarding
if you disobey. And consult the oracle, as Socrates thought men should, only
when the whole question turns upon the issue of events, and neither reason nor
any art of man provides opportunities for discovering what lies before you.
Therefore, when it is your duty to risk your life with friend or country, do
not ask the oracle whether you should risk your life. For if the prophet warns
you that the sacrifice is unfavourable, though it is plain that this means
death or exile or injury to some part of your body, yet reason requires that
even at this cost you must stand by your friend and share your country's
danger. Wherefore pay heed to the greater prophet, Pythian Apollo, who cast out
of his temple the man who did not help his friend when he was being killed.


