---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 51
---

How long will you wait to think yourself worthy of the highest and transgress
in nothing the clear pronouncement of reason? You have received the precepts
which you ought to accept, and you have accepted them. Why then do you still
wait for a master, that you may delay the amendment of yourself till he comes?
You are a youth no longer, you are now a full-grown man. If now you are
careless and indolent and are always putting off, fixing one day after another
as the limit when you mean to begin attending to yourself, then, living or
dying, you will make no progress but will continue unawares in ignorance.
Therefore make up your mind before it is too late to live as one who is mature
and proficient, and let all that seems best to you be a law that you cannot
transgress. And if you encounter anything troublesome or pleasant or glorious
or inglorious, remember that the hour of struggle is come, the Olympic contest
is here and you may put off no longer, and that one day and one action
determines whether the progress you have achieved is lost or maintained.

This was how Socrates attained perfection, paying heed to nothing but reason,
in all that he encountered. And if you are not yet Socrates, yet ought you to
live as one who would wish to be a Socrates.


