---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Manual  
Translator: Stephen Walton  
Date:       1997  
Source:
  label: ideonautics.net
  url: http://www.ideonautics.net/manual2.htm
Code:       sw  
Chapter: 25
---
##  25

Was another the guest of honor at a party? Was another asked for expert
counsel? Was another on the cover of Time or People this week? If these are
good things, rejoice for the people who got them. If they're not good things,
you shouldn't mind missing them. Remember that if you don't do the things
others do in chasing after what we can't control, you've got no claim to a
piece of that action. If you don't kowtow to the powerful and flatter them, you
can't expect to get the same rewards as someone who does. You're unfair and
impossible to please if you won't pay the going price for advantages and think
you should get them for nothing.

What's the price of a hamburger? A dollar, say. If someone else pays her dollar
and gets her hamburger, and you don't, she's no better off than you – she has
her hamburger, and you still have the dollar you didn't give.

There's no free dinner, either. If you weren't asked to a dinner party, you
didn't buy your invitation with the currency the host sells them for: attention
and praise. Pay the price, if it serves a purpose for you. But if you want to
withhold the praise and still get the invitation, you're a fool. If you don't
buy, what do you have? The pleasure of not having flattered, and exemption from
having to endure the airs that the host puts on.


