---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Manual  
Translator: Stephen Walton  
Date:       1997  
Source:
  label: ideonautics.net
  url: http://www.ideonautics.net/manual2.htm
Code:       sw  
Chapter: 31
---

As for religion, you can take this position: that God exists, that He runs the
universe well and fairly, that you should obey and yield to His will in
everything, and do so voluntarily, as following the wisest leader. Do this, and
you'll never blame God or feel He's neglected you. The only way to do this is
to stop trying to control things you can't control, and to see good and evil
only in those things that are truly up to you.

If you think any of the things you can't control is good or evil, then you'll
certainly, sooner or later, miss your good or encounter your evil, and then
you'll find fault and hate the cause of the circumstance. Nature makes all
animals avoid what seems harmful and what causes it, and seek what seems useful
and what causes that. It's impossible then for a rational person who thinks
she's been hurt to take pleasure in either the hurt itself or its cause.

A child resents the parent who gives nothing of the apparently good. That's
what made Polynices and Eteocles enemies: each had the idea that ruling Thebes
– by himself – was good. So it is with those who think God is holding out on
them: farmers, sailors, businessmen and those who've lost loved ones, all
sometimes curse God. It's not surprising; their interests determine their piety
or lack of it.

By contrast, one who looks after her attitudes, seeking and avoiding only
what's actually in her control, has no trouble maintaining a relationship with
God. And to worship according to the traditions of your family and community is
proper.


