Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Rolleston  
Date:       1881  
Source:     [letsreadgreek.com](http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/rolleston.htm)  
Code:       twr  

## 1

Of things that exist, some depend upon ourselves, others do not depend upon
ourselves. Of things that depend upon ourselves are our opinions and impulses,
desires and aversions, and, briefly, all that is of our own doing. Of things
that do not depend upon ourselves are the body, possessions, reputation, civil
authority, and, briefly, all that is not of our own doing.

And the things that depend upon ourselves are in their nature free, not liable
to hindrance or embarrassment, while the things that do not depend upon
ourselves are strengthless, servile, subject, alien.

Remember then, that if you take things which are by nature subject, to be free;
and things alien to be your proper interest, you will be embarrassed, you will
bewail yourself, you will be troubled, you will blame Gods and men. But if you
consider that only to be yours which truly is so, and the alien as what it is,
alien, then none shall ever compel you, none shall hinder you, you will blame
no one, you will accuse no one, you will not do the least thing reluctantly,
none shall harm you, you will have no foe, for you will suffer no injury.

Aiming then at things so high, remember that it is no moderate passion
wherewith you must attempt them, but you must utterly renounce some things, and
put some, for the present, aside, For if (let us say) you make this also your
object, to attain a position of authority and wealth, then you not only run the
risk (through aiming at the first things too) of failing to gain these ends,
but will most assuredly miss those others through which alone freedom and
happiness are born,

Straightway, then, practice saying to every harsh-seeming phantasm, *You are a
Phantasm, and not by any means the thing you appear to be.* Then realize it,
and test it according to the crIterions you possess; but especially by this
supreme criterion, whether it concerns anything that depends upon ourselves, or
something that does not depend upon ourselves, And if the latter, then be the
thought instantly at hand, It is nothing to me,

## 2

Remember that desire announces the aim of attaining the thing desired, and
aversion that of not falling into the thing shunned; and that to miss what you
desire is unfortunate, but it is misfortune to fall into what you shun, But you
can never fall into anything that you shun, if you will shun only things
contrary to Nature which lie within your power: but if you shun disease, or
death, or poverty, you will have misfortune, Withdraw then your aversion from
those things that do not depend upon ourselves, and place it upon those things
contrary to Nature which do depend upon ourselves,

And let desire, for the present, be utterly effaced; for if you are desiring
something of the kind that does not depend upon ourselves, it must needs be
that you miscarry,and of the things that do depend upon ourselves, of such as
you may fairly desire, none are yet open to you. Use therefore only [tentative]
advances and withdrawals, and that but lightly, and with exception, and
indifferently.

## 3

In the case of everything that allures the mind, or offers an advantage, or is
beloved by you, remember, from the least thing upward, to think of it in its
true nature. For instance, if you like an earthen jar, think *I like an earthen
jar*, for so your mind will not be confounded if it should break.  And if you
love your child or your wife, think *I love a mortal* and so you will not be
confounded when they die.


## 4

When you are about to take in hand some action, bethink yourself what it
really. Is that you are about to do If you propose to go to the bath, represent
to yourself all the things that take place at the bathing establishment, the
squirting of water, the beating, the bad language, the theft. And after this
fashion you will take the matter more safely in hand if you say *I intend simply
to bathe, and to maintain my purpose according to Nature.* And similarly with
every action. For thus if anything’ should occur to cross you in your bathing,
you will instantly think *I did not only intend to bathe, but also that my
purpose should be maintained according to Nature. But it will not be so
maintained lf I let myself be vexed at what occurs.*

## 5

It is not things in themselves, but the opinions held about them which trouble
and confuse our minds. Thus, Death is not really terrible — if it were so it
would have appeared so to Socrates— but the opinion about Death, that it is
terrible, that it is wherein the terror lies. Wherefore when we are hindered,
or confounded, or grieved, let us never cast the blame upon others, but upon
our selves; that is, on our opinions of things. A man untaught in philosophy
accuses others on the score of his misfortunes; he who has begun to be taught
accuses himself; he who is fully taught, neither others nor himself.

## 6

Be not puffed-up on account of any that is not of yourself.  If your horse were
proud and should say, *I am beautiful,* that would be tolerable.  But when you
are proud, and say, *I have a beautiful horse,* how that it is an excellence in
your horse that you are proud of.  What then is really your own?  This, to make
use of the phantasms. So that when you deal according to Nature in your use of
the phantasms,  then you may pride yourself, for then you will be priding
yourself on an excellence which is really your own.

## 7

Even as in a sea-voyage, when the ship is brought to anchor, and you go out to
fetch in water, you make a bye-work of gathering a few roots and shells upon
the way, but have need ever to keep your mind fixed upon the ship, and
constantly to look round lest at any time the master of the ship should call,
and must, if he call, cast away all those things, lest you be treated like the
sheep that are bound and thrown into the hold: So it is with human life also,
and nothing hinders the comparison if there be given wife and children instead
of shells and roots. And if the master call, run to the ship, forsaking all
those things and looking not behind.  And if you be in old age, go not far from
the ship at any time, lest the master should call, and you should not be ready.

## 8

Do not seek to have all things happen as you would choose them, but rather
choose them to happen as they do; and so shall the current of your life flow
free.

## 9

Disease is a hindrance of the body, not of the will, unless the will itself
consent. Lameness is a hindrance of the leg, not of the will. And this you may
say upon every occasion, for nothing can happen to you but you will find it a
hindrance, not of yourself, but of some other thing.

## 10

Remember, at anything that shall befall you, to turn to yourself, and seek what
faculty you possess for making use of it.  If you see a beautiful person, you
will find a faculty for that, namely, Self- mastery. If toil is laid upon you,
you will find the faculty of Perseverance If you are reviled, you will find
Patience, And making this your wont, you will not be rapt-away by the
phantasms.

## 11

Never in any case say *I have lost such a thing,* but *I have returned it*. Is
your child dead? it is a return. Is your wife dead? it is a return.  Are you
deprived of your estate? is not this also a return? *But he who deprives me of
it is wicked!* But what is that to you, through whom the giver demands his own!
As long therefore as he grants it to you, steward it like another’s property,
as travelers use an inn.

## 12

If you wish to advance in philosophy you must dismiss such considerations as
*If I neglect my affairs, I shall not have wherewithal to support life. If I do
not correct my servant, he will be good-for-nothing,* For it is better to die
of hunger, having lived without grief and fear, than to live with a troubled
spirit amid abundance. And it is better to have a bad servant, than an
afflicted mind.

Make a beginning then with small matters. Is a little of your oil spilt? or a
little wine stolen? Then say to yourself *For so much, tranquility of mind is
bought, this is the price of peace.* For nothing can be gained without paying
for it, And when you call your servant, reflect that he may not hear you, or
that hearing, he may not do your bidding. For him indeed that is not well, but
for you it is altogether well that be have not the power to disturb your mind.

## 13

If you wish to advance, you must be content to let people think you senseless
and distraught as regards external things.  Wish not ever to seem wise,  and if
ever you shall find yourself account to be somebody, then mistrust yourself.
For know that it is not an easy matter to make a choice that shall agree both
with external things and with Nature, but it must needs be that he who is
careful of the one shall neglect the other.

## 14

You are quite astray if you desire your wife and children and friends to live
for ever, for then you are desiring things that are not of yourself to be of
yourself, and to control that which is not in your power.  So also if you
desire that your servant never should display any shortcomings, you are a fool;
for that is as much as to desire that imperfection should not be imperfection,
but something else. But If you wish never to fall short of your desires, this
indeed is possible to you; this therefore practice, namely, the practicable.

You own a master when another has power over the things that are pleasing or
displeasing to you, to give them or to take them away. Whosoever then would be
free, let him neither desire nor shun any of the things that depend not upon
himself; otherwise he must needs be enslaved.

## 15

Bear in mind that you should conduct yourself in life as at a feast. Is some
dish brought to you? Then put forth your hand and help yourself in seemly
fashion. Does it pass you by? Then do not hold it back. Has it not yet come to
you? Then do not stretch out for it at a distance, but wait till it is at your
hand. And thus doing with regard to children, and wife, and authority, and
wealth, you will be a worthy guest at the table of the Gods, And if you even
pass over things that are offered to you, and refuse to take of them, then you
will not only share the banquet of the Gods, but also their dominion. For so
doing, Diogenes and Heracleitus and such as they were rightly divine, as they
were said to be.

## 16

When you shall see one lamenting in grief because his son is gone abroad, or
because he has lost his wealth, see to it that you be not rapt-away by the
phantasm, to think that he has suffered a real misfortune in external matters.
But be the thought at hand, *It is not the fact itself which afflicts this
man—since there are others whom it afflicts not—but the opinion he has
conceived about it.* And do not hesitate as far as words go, to give him your
sympathy, and even, if so it be, to lament with him. But take heed that your
lamenting be not from within.

## 17

Remember that you are an actor in a drama, of such a part as it may please the
master to assign you, for a long time or for a little as he may choose.  And if
he will you to take the part of a poor man, or  a cripple, or a ruler, or a
private citizen, then may you act that part with grace! For to act well the
part that is allotted to us, that indeed is ours to do, but to choose it is
another’s.

## 18

If a raven croaks you a bad omen, be not rapt away by the phantasm, but
straightway make a distinction with regard to yourself and say, *This bodes
something perhaps to this poor body or this little property of mine, or to my
reputation, or my wife or children, but to myself, nothing.  For to me, if I
will to have it so, all omens are fortunate.  And whatever of these things may
come to pass, it lies with me to reap some benefit from it.*

## 19

You may be always victorious if you will never enter into any contest where the
issue does not  wholly depend upon yourself.

When you see a man honored above others, or mighty in power, or otherwise in
high repute, look to it that you esteem him not blessed, being  rapt-away by
the phantasm.  For if Good, in its essence, be in those things which depend
upon ourselves, then there is no place for jealousy or envy, and you yourself
will not wish to be a general, or a prince, or a consul—but to be free.  And to
this there is but one way — disdain of the things that not up ourselves.

## 20

Remember that it is not he who strikes you or he who reviles you who does you
an injury, but the opinion you have about the things, that they are injurious.
Therefore when someone shall provoke you to wrath, know that you are provoked
by your own conception. Strive then at the outset not to be rapt-away by the
phantasm; for if you shall once succeed in gaining time and delay you will more
easily master yourself.

## 21

Death and exile and all things that appear terrible, let these be every day
before your eyes.  But Death most of all, for so you will never feel any
condition to be wretched, nor think any very greatly to be desired.

## 22

If you set your heart upon philosophy, you must straightway prepare yourself to
be laughed at and mocked by many who will say *Behold a philosopher  arisen
among us! or How came you by that brow of scorn?* But do you cherish no scorn,
but hold to those things which seem to you the best, as one set by God in that
place. Remember too, that if you abide in those ways, those who first mocked
you, the same shall afterwards reverence you; but if you yield to them, you
will be laughed at twice as much as before.

## 23

If ever it shall happen to you to be turned to things of the outside world in
the desire to make yourself acceptable to someone, know that you have lost your
position.  Let it be enough for you in all things to be a philosopher. But if
you desire also to seem one, then appear so to yourself, and it will suffice.

## 24

Never afflict yourself with such reflections as I shall live without honor and
never be anybody  anywhere. For if to live without hon our be really a
misfortune, know that it is not possible for you to fall into misfortune, any
more than into vice, through anything that another can do. Is it then of your
own doing that you are appointed to the magistracy or invited to feasts? By no
means, How then is this to be without hon our? and how do you say that you
shall never be anybody, whose part it is to be somebody in those things only
which depend upon yourself, and in which it is in your power to be of the
highest worth?

But then I can be of no service to my friends. How say you? of no service?
Certainly they shall not have money from you, nor will you be able to get them
made Roman citizens. But who told you that these things were of those that
depend upon ourselves, and were not alien to us? And who is able to give that
which be himself has not?

Acquire then, they say, in order that we may possess, Well, if I am able to
acquire, without a loss of modesty, or faith, or high-mindedness, show me the
way, and I will do it. But if you require me to sacrifice that which I have,
which is really good, in order that you may compass what is no good at all,
behold how unjust and inconsiderate you are! And is it not better than money,
to have faith and modesty in a friend? Then rather help me on my way, and take
part with me, than require me to do anything which would compel me to renounce
these things.

But, you say, *I shall not be bearing my part in the service of my country!*
Again, what do you take service to consist in? Your country will not be
enriched through you with porticos and public baths. And what then? The smith
does not supply her with shoes, nor the shoemaker with weapons, but it is
enough that every man fulfil his own work, And if you have made one faithful
and modest citizen for her, are you then of no service? Wherefore neither shall
you be useless to your country.

*What place then, you say, shall I hold in the State?* Whatever place you are
able to hold, guarding still your modesty and faith. But if you cast away these
things in order to be of service to the State, of what service do you think you
will be to her then, when you are perfected in the contrary qualities?

## 25

Is some one preferred before you at a feast or in salutation, or in being
invited to give counsel? Then if these things be good, you should rejoice that
he has gained them;  but if evil, why grieve that you have not? But remember
that if you do not do as other men, in order to gain the things that depend not
upon ourselves, neither shall you be rewarded as they.

For how is it possible for you to have an equal share with him who hangs about
other men’s doors, and attends upon them, and flatters them, when you yourself
will do none of these things? You are unjust then, and insatiable, if you wish
to gain the things that depend not upon ourselves, for nothing, and without
paying the price for which they are sold.

But how much is your head of lettuce sold for? A penny perchance. Go to, then:
if one will lay out a penny he may have a head of lettuce; but you who do not
choose to lay out your penny shall not have your lettuce. But you must not
suppose that you will be therefore worse off than he. For he has the
lettuce, but you the penny which you did not choose to part with.

And in this matter also the same principle holds good. You are not invited to
somebody’s banquet? That is because you did not give the entertainer the price
that banquets are sold for — and they are sold for flattery, they are sold for
attendance.  Pay then the price if you think you will profit by the exchange.
But if you are determined not to lay out these things, and at the same time to
gain the others—surely you are a greedy man, and an infatuated.

Shall you have nothing then instead of the banquet which you give up? Yea
verily, you shall have this — not to have praised one whom you did not care to
praise, nor to have endured the insolence of a rich man’s doorkeepers.

## 26

The will of Nature is to be learned from matters in which we ourselves are not
concerned.  For instance, when a boy breaks a cup, if it be another man’s, you
are ready enough to say, *Accidents will happen.* Know then, that  when your
own is broken it behoves you to be as though it were another man’s. And apply
this method even to greater things. When a neighbor’s wife or child dies, who
is there that will not say, *It is the lot of humanity.* But when your own wife
or child is dead, then it is straightway, *Alas! wretched that I am!* But you
ought to remember how you felt when you heard of another in the same plight.

## 27

As a mark is not set up to be missed, even so it is not possible that there
should be any soul of evil in the world.

## 28

If anyone were to expose your body in public, that every passerby might do as
he liked with it, you would be indignant. Is it nothing to be ashamed of then
that you should set your mind at the mercy of all the world, to be troubled and
disturbed whenever anyone should happen to revile you?

## 29

Of every work you take in hand to do, mark well the conditions and the
consequences, and so enter upon it. For if you do not this, you will at first
set out eagerly, not regarding what is to follow, but in the end thereof, if
any difficulties have arisen, you will leave it off with shame.

So you wish to conquer in the Olympic games, my friend? And I too, by the Gods,
and a fine thing it would be! But first mark the conditions and the
consequences, and then set to work. You will have to put yourself under
discipline; to eat by rule; to avoid cakes and sweetmeats; to take exercise at
the appointed hour whether you like it or no, in cold and heat; to abstain from
cold drinks and from wine at your will; in a word, to give yourself over to the
trainer as to a physician. Then in the conflict itself you are likely enough to
dislocate your wrist or twist your ankle, to swallow a great deal of dust, to
be severely thrashed, and, after all these things, to be defeated.

If, having considered these circumstances, you are still in the mind to enter
for the Olympic prize, then do so. But without consideration, you will turn
from one thing to another like a child, who now plays the wrestler, now the
flute player, now the gladiator, then sounds the bugle call, or declaims
like an actor; and so you too will be first an athlete, then a gladiator,
then an orator, then a philosopher, and nothing with your whole soul; but
as an ape you will mimic every sight you see, and flatter yourself with one
thing after another. For you approached nothing with consideration, nor
with systematic diligence, but lightly, and with but a cold desire.

And thus some men, after having seen a philosopher and heard discourse like
that of Euphrates (yet who indeed can say that any discourse is like his?)
desire that they also may become philosophers.

But O man —  first consider what it really is that you are desiring to do, and
then inquire of your own nature, whether you have power to support the
undertaking. Do you desire to become a pentathlos or a wrestler? Then scan
your arms and your thighs and try the strength of your loins. For nature endows
different men with different capacities.

And do you think that you can be a sage and at the same time continue to eat
and drink and indulge your desires and be fastidious, just as before? Nay
verily, for you must watch and labour, and withdraw yourself from your
household and be despised by any serving-boy and be ridiculed by your
neighbors, and you must take an inferior position in all things, in reputation,
in authority, in courts of justice, in dealings of every kind.

Consider these things; whether you are willing at such a price to gain
serenity, freedom, and immunity from vexation. And if not, renounce that aim at
once, and do not like a child at play be now for a little a philosopher, then a
tax-gatherer, then a public speaker, then a procurator of the Empire.  For
these things do not agree among themselves, and, good or bad, it behoves you to
be one man. You must either cultivate external things or your own essential
part, you must show your skill in the management of either your outward or your
inward life — in short, you must take up the position either of a sensualist
or of a sage.

## 30

Our duties are universally fixed by the relations in which we find ourselves.
Is such a man your father? Then your duty is to bear dictation from him, to
take care of him, to yield to him in all things, to be patient with him when be
chides you, when he beats you. *But if he be a bad father?*  Is there then a
natural law that you should be related by kin to a good father? No, but simply
to a father.  And does your brother do you wrong? Then guard your own proper
position towards him, and do not consider what he is doing, but rather what you
may do in order that your will may be in accordance with Nature. For no other
can ever harm you if you do not choose it yourself, but you are harmed then,
when you imagine yourself to be so. Thus then you may discover your duties by
considering those of a neighbor, of a citizen, of a general, —if you will
accustom yourself to observe the relationships.

## 31

If religion towards the Gods, know that the principal element is to have right
opinions about them, as existing, and as managing the Whole in fair order and
justice; and then to set yourself to obey them, and to yield to them in all
that happens and to follow it willingly, as accomplished under the highest
counsels. For thus you will never at any time blame the Gods, nor accuse them
of being neglectful.

But this can be done in no other way than by placing good and evil in the
things that depend upon ourselves, and withdrawing them from those that do not;
for if you take any of the latter things for good or evil, then when you fail
to obtain what you desire, and fall into what you would avoid, it is
inevitable that you must blame and hate those who caused you to do so.

For it is the inherent nature of every creature to fly from and shun all things
that appear harmful, and the causes of the same, but to follow after and admire
things, and the causes of things, which appear beneficial. It is impossible
then that one who thinks himself harmed should take delight in that which seems
to harm him, just as it is impossible that he should take delight in the very
injury itself.

And thus it is that a father is reviled by his son when he will not give him a
share of the things that are thought to be good. And it was this that set
Polyneices and Eteocles at war with each other, the opinion, namely, that
royalty was a good. And through this the Gods are blamed by the husband man and
the sailor, by the merchant and by those who lose their wives or children.  For
when advantage is, there also is religion. So that he who is careful to desire
and to dislike as he ought is careful at the same time of religion.

But it is right too that every man should pour libations, and offer sacrifices,
and offer firstfruits according to the customs of his fathers, purely, and not
supinely, nor negligently, nor indeed scantily, yet not beyond his means.

## 32

Then you go to inquire of an oracle, remember that though you do not know
beforehand what the event will be (for this very thing is what you have come to
learn from the seer), yet of what nature it must be (if you are a philosopher),
you knew already when you came.  For if it be of those things which do not
depend upon ourselves, it follows of necessity that it can be neither good nor
evil.

When you go then to the seer, bring with you neither desire nor aversion, and
approach him, not with trembling, but with the full assurance that all events
are indifferent, and nothing to you, and that whatever may befall you it will
be your part to use it nobly; and this no one can prevent.  Go then with a good
courage to the Gods as to counselors, and, for the rest, when something has
been counseled to you, remember who they are whom you have chosen for
counselors, and whom you will be slighting if you are not obedient.

Therefore, as Socrates insisted, you should consult the oracle in those cases
only where your judgment depends entirely upon the event, and where you have no
resources, either from reason or any other method, for knowing beforehand what
is independently certain in the case. Thus, when it may behove you to share
some danger with your friend or your country, do not inquire whether you may
[safely] do so. For if the seer should announce to you that the sacrifices are
inauspicious, that clearly signifies death, or the loss of some limb, or
banishment; yet Reason convinces that even with these things you should stand
by your friend and share your country’s danger. Mark therefore that greater
seer, the Pythian, who cast out of the temple one who, when his friend was
being murdered, did not help him.

## 33

Ordain for yourself forthwith a certain principle and outline of conduct which
you may observe both when you are alone and among men.

And for the most part keep silence, or speak only what is necessary, and in few
words. But when occasion shall require us to speak, then we shall speak, but
sparingly, and not about any subject at haphazard, nor about gladiators, nor
horse races, nor athletes, nor about things to eat or drink, which one hears
talked about everywhere, but especially not about men, as blaming, or praising,
or comparing them.

If then you are able, let your discourse draw that of the company towards what
is fitting; but if you find yourself apart among strangers, keep silence.

Do not laugh much, nor at many things, nor unrestrainedly.

Refuse altogether to take an oath, if possible; if not, then as much as
circumstances permit.

Avoid banquets given by strangers and by the sensual. But if you ever have
occasion to go to them, then keep your attention on the stretch that you do not
fall into sensuality. For know that if your companion be corrupted, you, who
have conversation with him, must needs become corrupted also, even though
yourself should chance to be pure.

In things that concern the body, such as food, drink, clothing, habitation,
servants, you must only accept what is absolutely needful. But all that makes
for show or luxury, you must utterly proscribe.

Concerning sexual pleasures, it is right to be pure before marriage, as much as
in you lies, But if you do indulge in them, let it be according to what is
lawful. But do not in any case make yourself disagreeable to those who use
such pleasures, nor be fond of reproving them, nor of putting yourself forward
as not using them.

If you shall be informed that some one has been speaking ill of you, do not
defend yourself against his accusations, but answer, *He little knew what other
vices there are in me, or he would have said more than that.*

You need not go often to the arena; if how ever occasion should take you there,
do not appear interested on any man’s side except your own; that is to say,
desire that that only may happen which does happen, and that the conqueror
may be be who wins; for so shall you not be embarrassed. But shouting, and
laughter at this or that, and gesticulation, all this you must utterly
abstain from.  And after you have gone away, do not talk much over what has
passed, so far as it does not tend towards your own improvement. For from
that it would appear that you bad been impressed with the spectacle.

Do not attend everybody’s recitations nor be easily induced to go to them. But
if you do go, preserve (yet without making yourself offensive) your gravity and
tranquility.

When you are about to meet any person, especially if he be one of those
considered to be high in rank, put before yourself what Socrates or Zeno would
have done in such a case. And then you will not fail to deal fittingly with the
occasion.

When you are going to see one of those who are great in power, imagine that you
will not find him at home, that you will be shut out, that the doors will be
banged in your face, that he will take no notice of you. And if in spite of
these things it be right for you to go, then go, and bear whatever may happen,
and never say to yourself I did not deserve such treatment.  For that is
sensual, and shows that you are subject to vexation from external things.

In company, be it far from you to bring your own doings and dangers constantly
and disproportionately into notice. For though it is pleasant for you to tell
of your own dangers, yet your adventures are not equally pleasant for other
persons to hear.

Be it far from you to move laughter. For that habit easily slips into
sensuality; and it is always enough to lower your neighbor's respect for you.

And it is dangerous to approach to vicious conversation. Therefore when
anything of the kind may arise, rebuke him who approaches thereto, if you can
do so opportunely. But if not, show at least by your silence, and blushing, and
serious looks that his words are disagreeable to you.

## 34

When you have conceived the phantasm of some pleasure, guard yourself that you
be not rapt-away by it, but delay with yourself a little and let the thIng
await you for a while. And then bethink yourself of the two periods of time,
the one in which you will enjoy the pleasure, the other, in which, after having
enjoyed it, you will repent of it, and reproach yourself; and set over against
this how you will rejoice and commend yourself if you have abstained. But if it
shall seem fitting to you to do the thing, beware lest you have been conquered
by the flattery and the sweetness and the allurement of it. But set on the
other side how much better would be the consciousness of having won that
victory.

## 35

When you are doing something which you have clearly recognized as being right
to do, do not seek to avoid observation in the act, even though you should know
that the multitude will form a wrong opinion about it, For if you are acting
wrongly, then you should have avoided the action altogether. But if rightly,
why fear those who wrongly rebuke you?

## 36

As the sayings *It is day, It is night,* are perfectly justifiable if viewed
disjunctively, but unjustifiable if viewed together, even so, at a feast, to
pick out the largest portion for oneself may be justifiable if the act is
viewed merely as it concerns the body, but is unjustifiable if viewed as it
concerns the preservation of the proper community of the feast. Therefore when
you are eating with another person, remember not merely to look at the value
for the body of the things that are set before you, but to preserve also the
reverence due to the giver of the feast.

## 37

If you have assumed a part beyond your power to play, then you have not only
come to shame in that, but have missed one which you could have thoroughly
fulfilled.

## 38

In going about, as you are careful not to step upon a nail or twist your foot,
even so be careful that you do no injury to your own essential part. And if we
observe this we shall the more safely undertake whatever we have to do.

## 39

The measure of gain for every man is the body, as the foot is of the shoe. If
you take this as your standpoint, you will preserve the measure. But if you go
beyond it, you must thenceforward of necessity be borne, as it were, down a
steep for the rest of the way. And so it is with the shoe; if you go beyond
[what is proper for] the foot, you will have your shoe first gilded, then dyed
purple, then embroidered. For there is no end to that which has once
transgressed its measure.

## 40

From the age of fourteen years upwards women are accustomed to the flattery of
men.  Seeing then that there is nothing else open to them but only to serve the
pleasure of men, they begin to beautify themselves and to place all their hopes
in this, It is right then to study that they may perceive themselves to be
valued for nothing else than modesty and decorum.

## 41

It is a sign of a dull nature to occupy oneself deeply in matters that concern
the body; for instance, to be over much occupied about exercise, about eating
and drinking, about easing oneself, about sexual intercourse. But all these
things should be done by the way, and only the mind receive your full
attention.

## 42

When some one may do you an injury or speak ill of you, remember that he does
it or speaks it under the impression that it is proper for him to do so. He
must then of necessity follow not the appearance which the case presents to
you, but that which it presents to him. Wherefore, if it has a bad appearance
to him, it is he who is injured, being deceived. For if anyone should take a
true statement to be false, it is not the statement which is damaged, but he
who is deceived. If then you set out from these principles, you will bear a
gentle mind towards anyone who reviles you. For say on each occasion, *So it
appeared to him.*

## 43

Every matter has two handles; by the one you can carry it, by the other you
cannot. If your brother wrongs you, do not take this by the handle *He wrongs
me,* for by that handle you can not carry it; but take it rather by this, *He
is my brother, nourished with me,* and then you will be taking it by a handle
by which you can carry it.

## 44

There is no nexus in the following reasonings: I am richer than you, therefore
I am superior to you; I am more eloquent than you, therefore I am superior. But
the nexus is rather in these: I am richer than you, therefore my wealth is
superior to yours; I am more eloquent than you, therefore my language is
superior to yours. But you are not wealth, and you are not language.

## 45

Does a man bathe himself quickly? Then say not Badly, but Quickly. Does be
drink much wine? Then say not Too much, but Much. For before you have discerned
how things appear to him, how can you know if it were done badly? Thus it will
not happen to you to surrender yourself to certain of the phantasms which lay
hold of the mind, while comprehending others.

## 46

Never proclaim yourself a philosopher, nor talk much among the sensual about
the philosophic maxims; but do the things that follow from the maxims. For
example, do not discourse, at a feast, upon how one ought to eat, but eat as
you ought. For remember that even so Socrates everywhere banished ostentation,
so that men used to come to him desiring him to recommend them to teachers in
philosophy; and he brought them away and did so, so well did he bear being
overlooked.

And if, among the sensual, discourse should arise concerning some maxim, do you
for the most part keep silence; for there is great risk that you straightway
vomit up what you, have not digested. And when some one shall say to you
that you know nothing, and you are not offended, then know that the work is
begun. And as sheep do not bring their food to the shepherds, to show how
much they have eaten, but digesting inwardly their provender bear outwardly
wool and milk, even so do not you, for the most part, display your maxims
before the sensual, but rather the works which follow from them, when they
are digested.

## 47

When you have harmonized yourself to a frugal provision for your bodily needs,
do not pride yourself on that; and if your drink is water, do not take every
opportunity of declaring I am a water drinker. And if you wish at any time
to inure yourself to labour and endurance, do it unto yourself and not unto
the world, and do not embrace the statues, but some time when you are
exceedingly thirsty take a draught of cold water into your mouth, and spit
it out, and say nothing about it.

## 48

The position and character of the sensualist: he never looks to himself for
benefit or harm, but always to external things. The position and character of
the sage: be looks for benefit or harm only to himself.

The tokens of one who is making advance: he blames none; he praises none; he
finds fault with none; he accuses none; he never speaks of himself as being
somewhat, or as knowing aught; when he is let or hindered in anything he
accuses himself; if anyone praises him, he laughs at him in his sleeve; if
anyone blames him, he makes no defence; he goes about like convalescents,
fearing to move the parts that are settling together before they have taken
hold.

He has taken out of himself all desire, and has transferred his aversion solely
to things contrary to Nature which depend upon ourselves. He attempts nothing,
except lightly and indifferently. If he is thought foolish or unlearned, he is
not concerned. In one word, he watches himself as he would a treacherous enemy.

## 49

When someone himself on act of his powers of understanding and expounding the
writings Chrysippus, then say to yourself, If Chrysippus had not written
obscurely, this man would have nothing  whereon to exalt himself. But I, what
do I desire? Is it not to learn to understand Nature and to follow her? I
inquire, then, who can expound Nature to me and hearing that Chrysippus
can, I betake myself to him. But I do not understand his writings,
therefore I seek an expounder for them. And so far there is nothing
exalted. But when I have found the expounder, it remains for me to put into
practice what he declares to me; and in this alone is there anything
exalted. But if I look on the exposition as a thing to be admired in
itself, what else am I become than a grammarian instead of a sage? except
that the exposition is not of Homer but of Chrysippus. Therefore when one
may ask me to lecture on the philosophy of Chrysippus, I shall rather blush
when I am not able to show forth works of a like nature and in harmony with
the words.

## 50

Whatsoever things are preferred, in these abide as in laws which it were
impious to transgress. And whatever anyone may say of you, regard it not, for
neither does this concern your self.

## 51

How long will you still delay to hold yourself worthy of the best things, and
to transgress in nothing the defining word? You have accepted the maxims by
which you ought to live, and do you live by them? What teacher do you still
look for, to whom to hand over the task of your correction? You are no longer a
boy, but now a full grown man.  If, then,you are neglectful and indifferent,
and make delay after delay, and form purpose after purpose, and fix again and
again the days after which you will begin to attend to yourself, you will not
see that you are making no advance, but will be now and always a sensualist,
living and dying.

Therefore hold yourself worthy forthwith to live as a man of full age, and with
your foot on the path; and let whatever appears to you as the best be to you as
an inviolable law. And when anything is presented to you which involves toil,
or pleasure, or reputation or the loss of it, remember that now is the
conflict, here are the Olympic games, and you can put them off no longer; and
that in a single day and in a single trial ground is to be lost or gained.

It was thus that Socrates made himself what he was, on every occasion bringing
forward his true self, and never having regard to anything else than Reason,
And you, though you are not yet Socrates, yet as one who desires to be Socrates
so you ought to live.

## 52

The first and most necessary point in philosophy is the practice of the maxims,
for example, not to lie. The second is the proof of the maxims, as, Whence it
comes that one ought not to lie. The third is that which gives confirmation
and coherence to these, as, Whence it comes that this is a proof, for what
is proof? what is consequence? what is contradiction? what is truth? what
is falsehood?

Thus the third point is necessary through the second, and the second through
the first. But the most necessary of all, and that where we must rest, is the
first. But we do the contrary. For we delay in the third point, and spend all
our zeal upon that, while of the first we are utterly careless: we are liars,
while we are ready in explaining how it is shown that it is wrong to lie.

## 53

Hold in readiness for every heed, these—

‘Lead me, O Zeus, and thou Destiny, whithersoever ye have appointed me to go,
and may I follow fearlessly.

‘But if in an evil mind I be unwilling, still must I follow,’

‘That man is wise among us, and has understanding of things divine, who has
nobly agreed with Necessity.’

But the third also—

‘O Crito, if so it seem good to the Gods, so let it be; Anytus and Melitus are
able to kill me if they like, but to harm me, never,’
