---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 1
---
##  1

Some things are in our control and others not. Things in our control are
opinion, pursuit, desire, aversion, and, in a word, whatever are our own
actions. Things not in our control are body, property, reputation, command,
and, in one word, whatever are not our own actions.

The things in our control are by nature free, unrestrained, unhindered; but
those not in our control are weak, slavish, restrained, belonging to others.
Remember, then, that if you suppose that things which are slavish by nature are
also free, and that what belongs to others is your own, then you will be
hindered. You will lament, you will be disturbed, and you will find fault both
with gods and men. But if you suppose that only to be your own which is your
own, and what belongs to others such as it really is, then no one will ever
compel you or restrain you. Further, you will find fault with no one or accuse
no one. You will do nothing against your will. No one will hurt you, you will
have no enemies, and you not be harmed.

Aiming therefore at such great things, remember that you must not allow
yourself to be carried, even with a slight tendency, towards the attainment of
lesser things. Instead, you must entirely quit some things and for the present
postpone the rest. But if you would both have these great things, along with
power and riches, then you will not gain even the latter, because you aim at
the former too: but you will absolutely fail of the former, by which alone
happiness and freedom are achieved.

Work, therefore to be able to say to every harsh appearance, "You are but an
appearance, and not absolutely the thing you appear to be." And then examine it
by those rules which you have, and first, and chiefly, by this: whether it
concerns the things which are in our own control, or those which are not; and,
if it concerns anything not in our control, be prepared to say that it is
nothing to you.


