---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 24
---

Don't allow such considerations as these distress you. "I will live in
dishonor, and be nobody anywhere." For, if dishonor is an evil, you can no more
be involved in any evil by the means of another, than be engaged in anything
base. Is it any business of yours, then, to get power, or to be admitted to an
entertainment? By no means.  How, then, after all, is this a dishonor? And how
is it true that you will be nobody anywhere, when you ought to be somebody in
those things only which are in your own control, in which you may be of the
greatest consequence? "But my friends will be unassisted." -- What do you mean
by unassisted? They will not have money from you, nor will you make them Roman
citizens. Who told you, then, that these are among the things in our own
control, and not the affair of others?  And who can give to another the things
which he has not himself? "Well, but get them, then, that we too may have a
share." If I can get them with the preservation of my own honor and fidelity
and greatness of mind, show me the way and I will get them; but if you require
me to lose my own proper good that you may gain what is not good, consider how
inequitable and foolish you are. Besides, which would you rather have, a sum of
money, or a friend of fidelity and honor? Rather assist me, then, to gain this
character than require me to do those things by which I may lose it. Well, but
my country, say you, as far as depends on me, will be unassisted. Here again,
what assistance is this you mean? "It will not have porticoes nor baths of your
providing." And what signifies that? Why, neither does a smith provide it with
shoes, or a shoemaker with arms. It is enough if everyone fully performs his
own proper business. And were you to supply it with another citizen of honor
and fidelity, would not he be of use to it? Yes. Therefore neither are you
yourself useless to it. "What place, then, say you, will I hold in the state?"
Whatever you can hold with the preservation of your fidelity and honor. But if,
by desiring to be useful to that, you lose these, of what use can you be to
your country when you are become faithless and void of shame.


