---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 25
---
##  25

Is anyone preferred before you at an entertainment, or in a compliment, or in
being admitted to a consultation? If these things are good, you ought to be
glad that he has gotten them; and if they are evil, don't be grieved that you
have not gotten them. And remember that you cannot, without using the same
means [which others do] to acquire things not in our own control, expect to be
thought worthy of an equal share of them. For how can he who does not frequent
the door of any [great] man, does not attend him, does not praise him, have an
equal share with him who does? You are unjust, then, and insatiable, if you are
unwilling to pay the price for which these things are sold, and would have them
for nothing. For how much is lettuce sold? Fifty cents, for instance. If
another, then, paying fifty cents, takes the lettuce, and you, not paying it,
go without them, don't imagine that he has gained any advantage over you. For
as he has the lettuce, so you have the fifty cents which you did not give. So,
in the present case, you have not been invited to such a person's
entertainment, because you have not paid him the price for which a supper is
sold.  It is sold for praise; it is sold for attendance. Give him then the
value, if it is for your advantage. But if you would, at the same time, not pay
the one and yet receive the other, you are insatiable, and a blockhead. Have
you nothing, then, instead of the supper? Yes, indeed, you have: the not
praising him, whom you don't like to praise; the not bearing with his behavior
at coming in.


