---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 33
---

Immediately prescribe some character and form of conduce to yourself, which you
may keep both alone and in company.

Be for the most part silent, or speak merely what is necessary, and in few
words. We may, however, enter, though sparingly, into discourse sometimes when
occasion calls for it, but not on any of the common subjects, of gladiators, or
horse races, or athletic champions, or feasts, the vulgar topics of
conversation; but principally not of men, so as either to blame, or praise, or
make comparisons. If you are able, then, by your own conversation bring over
that of your company to proper subjects; but, if you happen to be taken among
strangers, be silent.

Don't allow your laughter be much, nor on many occasions, nor profuse.

Avoid swearing, if possible, altogether; if not, as far as you are able.

Avoid public and vulgar entertainments; but, if ever an occasion calls you to
them, keep your attention upon the stretch, that you may not imperceptibly
slide into vulgar manners. For be assured that if a person be ever so sound
himself, yet, if his companion be infected, he who converses with him will be
infected likewise.

Provide things relating to the body no further than mere use; as meat, drink,
clothing, house, family. But strike off and reject everything relating to show
and delicacy.

As far as possible, before marriage, keep yourself pure from familiarities with
women, and, if you indulge them, let it be lawfully." But don't therefore be
troublesome and full of reproofs to those who use these liberties, nor
frequently boast that you yourself don't.

If anyone tells you that such a person speaks ill of you, don't make excuses
about what is said of you, but answer: " He does not know my other faults, else
he would not have mentioned only these."

It is not necessary for you to appear often at public spectacles; but if ever
there is a proper occasion for you to be there, don't appear more solicitous
for anyone than for yourself; that is, wish things to be only just as they are,
and him only to conquer who is the conqueror, for thus you will meet with no
hindrance. But abstain entirely from declamations and derision and violent
emotions. And when you come away, don't discourse a great deal on what has
passed, and what does not contribute to your own amendment. For it would appear
by such discourse that you were immoderately struck with the show.

Go not [of your own accord] to the rehearsals of any (authors) , nor appear [at
them] readily. But, if you do appear, keepyour gravity and sedateness, and at
the same time avoid being morose.

When you are going to confer with anyone, and particularly of those in a
superior station, represent to yourself how Socrates or Zeno would behave in
such a case, and you will not be at a loss to make a proper use of whatever may
occur.

When you are going to any of the people in power, represent to yourself that
you will not find him at home; that you will not be admitted; that the doors
will not be opened to you; that he will take no notice of you. If, with all
this, it is your duty to go, bear what happens, and never say [to yourself], "
It was not worth so much." For this is vulgar, and like a man dazed by external
things.

In parties of conversation, avoid a frequent and excessive mention of your own
actions and dangers. For, however agreeable it may be to yourself to mention
the risks you have run, it is not equally agreeable to others to hear your
adventures. Avoid, likewise, an endeavor to excite laughter. For this is a
slippery point, which may throw you into vulgar manners, and, besides, may be
apt to lessen you in the esteem of your acquaintance. Approaches to indecent
discourse are likewise dangerous. Whenever, therefore, anything of this sort
happens, if there be a proper opportunity, rebuke him who makes advances that
way; or, at least, by silence and blushing and a forbidding look, show yourself
to be displeased by such talk.


