---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: Elizabeth Carter  
Date:       1750  
Source:
   label: mit.edu
   url: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html
Code:       ec  
Chapter: 51
---

How long, then, will you put off thinking yourself worthy of the highest
improvements and follow the distinctions of reason? You have received the
philosophical theorems, with which you ought to be familiar, and you have been
familiar with them. What other master, then, do you wait for, to throw upon
that the delay of reforming yourself? You are no longer a boy, but a grown man.
If, therefore, you will be negligent and slothful, and always add
procrastination to procrastination, purpose to purpose, and fix day after day
in which you will attend to yourself, you will insensibly continue without
proficiency, and, living and dying, persevere in being one of the vulgar. This
instant, then, think yourself worthy of living as a man grown up, and a
proficient. Let whatever appears to be the best be to you an inviolable law.
And if any instance of pain or pleasure, or glory or disgrace, is set before
you, remember that now is the combat, now the Olympiad comes on, nor can it be
put off. By once being defeated and giving way, proficiency is lost, or by the
contrary preserved. Thus Socrates became perfect, improving himself by
everything. attending to nothing but reason. And though you are not yet a
Socrates, you ought, however, to live as one desirous of becoming a Socrates.


