Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:     [letsreadgreek.com](http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm)  
Code:       pem  

## 1

Of all existing things some are in our power, and others are not in our power.
In our power are thought, impulse, will to get and will to avoid, and, in a
word, everything which is our own doing. Things not in our power include the
body, property, reputation, office, and, in a word, everything which is not our
own doing. Things in our power are by nature free, unhindered, untrammelled;
things not in our power are weak, servile, subject to hindrance, dependent on
others. Remember then that if you imagine that what is naturally slavish is
free, and what is naturally another's is your own, you will be hampered, you
will mourn, you will be put to confusion, you will blame gods and men; but if
you think that only your own belongs to you, and that what is another's is
indeed another's, no one will ever put compulsion or hindrance on you, you will
blame none, you will accuse none, you will do nothing against your will, no one
will harm you, you will have no enemy, for no harm can touch you.

Aiming then at these high matters, you must remember that to attain them
requires more than ordinary effort; you will have to give up some things
entirely, and put off others for the moment. And if you would have these
also—office and wealth—it may be that you will fail to get them, just because
your desire is set on the former, and you will certainly fail to attain those
things which alone bring freedom and happiness.

Make it your study then to confront every harsh impression with the words, 'You
are but an impression, and not at all what you seem to be'. Then test it by
those rules that you possess; and first by this—the chief test of all—'Is it
concerned with what is in our power or with what is not in our power?' And if
it is concerned with what is not in our power, be ready with the answer that it
is nothing to you.

## 2

Remember that the will to get promises attainment of what you will, and the
will to avoid promises escape from what you avoid; and he who fails to get what
he wills is unfortunate, and he who does not escape what he wills to avoid is
miserable. If then you try to avoid only what is unnatural in the region within
your control, you will escape from all that you avoid; but if you try to avoid
disease or death or poverty you will be miserable.

Therefore let your will to avoid have no concern with what is not in man's
power; direct it only to things in man's power that are contrary to nature. But
for the moment you must utterly remove the will to get; for if you will to get
something not in man's power you are bound to be unfortunate; while none of the
things in man's power that you could honourably will to get is yet within your
reach. Impulse to act and not to act, these are your concern; yet exercise them
gently and without strain, and provisionally.

## 3

When anything, from the meanest thing upwards, is attractive or serviceable or
an object of affection, remember always to say to yourself, 'What is its
nature?' If you are fond of a jug, say you are fond of a jug; then you will not
be disturbed if it be broken. If you kiss your child or your wife, say to
yourself that you are kissing a human being, for then if death strikes it you
will not be disturbed.

## 4

When you are about to take something in hand, remind yourself what manner of
thing it is. If you are going to bathe put before your mind what happens in the
bath—water pouring over some, others being jostled,. some reviling, others
stealing; and you will set to work more securely if you say to yourself at
once: 'I want to bathe, and I want to keep my will in harmony with nature,' and
so in each thing you do; for in this way, if anything turns up to hinder you in
your bathing, you will be ready to say, 'I did not want only to bathe, but to
keep my will in harmony with nature, and I shall not so keep it, if I lose my
temper at what happens'.

## 5

What disturbs men's minds is not events but their judgements on events: For
instance, death is nothing dreadful, or else Socrates would have thought it so.
No, the only dreadful thing about it is men's judgement that it is dreadful.
And so when we are hindered, or disturbed, or distressed, let us never lay the
blame on others, but on ourselves, that is, on our own judgements. To accuse
others for one's own misfortunes is a sign of want of education; to accuse
oneself shows that one's education has begun; to accuse neither oneself nor
others shows that one's education is complete.

## 6

Be not elated at an excellence which is not your own. If the horse in his pride
were to say, 'I am handsome', we could bear with it. But when you say with
pride, 'I have a handsome horse', know that the good horse is the ground of
your pride. You ask then what you can call your own. The answer is—the way you
deal with your impressions. Therefore when you deal with your impressions in
accord with nature, then you may be proud indeed, for your pride will be in a
good which is your own.

## 7

When you are on a voyage, and your ship is at anchorage, and you disembark to
get fresh water, you may pick up a small shellfish or a truffle by the way, but
you must keep your attention fixed on the ship, and keep looking towards it
constantly, to see if the Helmsman calls you; and if he does, you have to leave
everything, or be bundled on board with your legs tied like a sheep. So it is
in life. If you have a dear wife or child given you, they are like the
shellfish or the truffle, they are very well in their way. Only, if the
Helmsman call, run back to your ship, leave all else, and do not look behind
you. And if you are old, never go far from the ship, so that when you are
called you may not fail to appear.

## 8

Ask not that events should happen as you will, but let your will be that events
should happen as they do, and you shall have peace.

## 9

Sickness is a hindrance to the body, but not to the will, unless the will
consent. Lameness is a hindrance to the leg, but not to the will. Say this to
yourself at each event that happens, for you shall find that though it hinders
something else it will not hinder you.

## 10

When anything happens to you, always remember to turn to yourself and ask what
faculty you have to deal with it. If you see a beautiful boy or a beautiful
woman, you will find continence the faculty to exercise there; if trouble is
laid on you, you will find endurance; if ribaldry, you will find patience. And
if you train yourself in this habit your impressions will not carry you away.

## 11

Never say of anything, 'I lost it', but say, 'I gave it back'. Has your child
died? It was given back. Has your wife died? She was given back. Has your
estate been taken from you? Was not this also given back? But you say, 'He who
took it from me is wicked'. What does it matter to you through whom the Giver
asked it back? As long as He gives it you, take care of it, but not as your
own; treat it as passers-by treat an inn.

## 12

If you wish to make progress, abandon reasonings of this sort: 'If I neglect my
affairs I shall have nothing to live on'; 'If I do not punish my son, he will
be wicked.' For it is better to die of hunger, so that you be free from pain
and free from fear, than to live in plenty and be troubled in mind. It is
better for your son to be wicked than for you to be miserable. Wherefore begin
with little things. Is your drop of oil spilt? Is your sup of wine stolen? Say
to yourself, 'This is the price paid for freedom from passion, this is the
price of a quiet mind.' Nothing can be had without a price. When you call your
slave-boy, reflect that he may not be able to hear you, and if he hears you, he
may not be able to do anything you want. But he is not so well off that it
rests with him to give you peace of mind.

## 13

If you wish to make progress, you must be content in external matters to seem a
fool and a simpleton; do not wish men to think you know anything, and if any
should think you to be somebody, distrust yourself. For know that it is not
easy to keep your will in accord with nature and at the same time keep outward
things; if you attend to one you must needs neglect the other.

## 14

It is silly to want your children and your wife and your friends to live for
ever, for that means that you want what is not in your control to be in your
control, and what is not your own to be yours. In the same way if you want your
servant to make no mistakes, you are a fool, for you want vice not to be vice
but something different. But if you want not to be disappointed in your will to
get, you can attain to that.

Exercise yourself then in what lies in your power. Each man's master is the man
who has authority over what he wishes or does not wish, to secure the one or to
take away the other. Let him then who wishes to be free not wish for anything
or avoid anything that depends on others; or else he is bound to be a slave.

## 15

Remember that you must behave in life as you would at a banquet. A dish is
handed round and comes to you; put out your hand and take it politely. It
passes you; do not stop it. It has not reached you; do not be impatient to get
it, but wait till your turn comes. Bear yourself thus towards children, wife,
office, wealth, and one day you will be worthy to banquet with the gods. But if
when they are set before you, you do not take them but despise them, then you
shall not only share the gods’ banquet, but shall share their rule. For by so
doing Diogenes and Heraclitus and men like them were called divine and deserved
the name.

## 16

When you see a man shedding tears in sorrow for a child abroad or dead, or for
loss of property, beware that you are not carried away by the impression that
it is outward ills that make him miserable. Keep this thought by you: 'What
distresses him is not the event, for that does not distress another, but his
judgement on the event.' Therefore do not hesitate to sympathize with him so
far as words go, and if it so chance, even to groan with him; but take heed
that you do not also groan in your inner being.

## 17

Remember that you are an actor in a play, and the Playwright chooses the manner
of it: if he wants it short, it is short; if long, it is long. If he wants you
to act a poor man you must act the part with all your powers; and so if your
part be a cripple or a magistrate or a plain man. For your business is to act
the character that is given you and act it well; the choice of the cast is
Another's.

## 18

When a raven croaks with evil omen, let not the impression carry you away, but
straightway distinguish in your own mind and say, 'These portents mean nothing
to me; but only to my bit of a body or my bit of property or name, or my
children or my wife. But for me all omens are favourable if I will, for,
whatever the issue may be, it is in my power to pt benefit therefrom.'

## 19

You can be invincible, if you never enter on a contest where victory is not in
your power. Beware then that when you see a man raised to honour or great power
or high repute you do not let your impression carry you away.  For if the
reality of good lies in what is in our power, there is no room for envy or
jealousy. And you will not wish to be praetor, or prefect or consul, but to be
free; and there is but one way to freedom—to despise what is not in our power.

## 20

Remember that foul words or blows in themselves are no outrage, but your
judgement that they are so. So when any one makes you angry, know that it is
your own thought that has angered you. Wherefore make it your first endeavour
not to let your impressions carry you away. For if once you gain time and
delay, you will find it easier to control yourself.

## 21

Keep before your eyes from day to day death and exile and all things that seem
terrible, but death most of all, and then you will never set your thoughts on
what is low and will never desire anything beyond measure.

## 22

If you set your desire on philosophy you must at once prepare to meet with
ridicule and the jeers of many who will say, 'Here he is again, turned
philosopher. Where has he got these proud looks?' Nay, put on no proud looks,
but hold fast to what seems best to you, in confidence that God has set you at
this post. And remember that if you abide where you are, those who first laugh
at you will one day admire you, and that if you give way to them, you will get
doubly laughed at.

## 23

If it ever happen to you to be diverted to things outside, so that you desire
to please another, know that you have lost your life's plan. Be content then
always to be a philosopher; if you wish to be regarded as one too, show
yourself that you are one and you will be able to achieve it.

## 24

Let not reflections such as these afflict you: 'I shall live without honour,
and never be of any account'; for if lack of honour is an evil, no one but
yourself can involve you in evil any more than in shame. Is it your business to
get office or to be invited to an entertainment?

Certainly not.

Where then is the dishonour you talk of? How can you be 'of no account
anywhere', when you ought to count for something in those matters only which
are in your power, where you may achieve the highest worth? 'But my friends,'
you say, 'will lack assistance.'

What do you mean by 'lack assistance'? They will not have cash from you and you
will not make them Roman citizens. Who told you that to do these things is in
our power, and not dependent upon others? Who can give to another what is not
his to give?

'Get them then,' says he, 'that we may have them.'

If I can get them and keep my self-respect, honour, magnanimity, show the way
and I will get them. But if you call on me to lose the good things that are
mine, in order that you may win things that are not good, look how unfair and
thoughtless you are. And which do you really prefer? Money, or a faithful,
modest friend? Therefore help me rather to keep these qualities, and do not
expect from me actions which will make me lose them.

'But my country,' says he, 'will lack assistance, so far as lies in me.'

Once more I ask, What assistance do you mean? It will not owe colonnades or
baths to you. What of that? It does not owe shoes to the blacksmith or arms to
the shoemaker; it is sufficient if each man fulfils his own function. Would you
do it no good if you secured to it another faithful and modest citizen?

'Yes.'

Well, then, you would not be useless to it.

'What place then shall I have in the city?'

Whatever place you can hold while you keep your character for honour and
self-respect. But if you are going to lose these qualities in trying to benefit
your city, what benefit, I ask, would you have done her when you attain to the
perfection of being lost to shame and honour?

## 25

Has some one had precedence of you at an entertainment or a levée or been
called in before you to give advice? If these things are good you ought to be
glad that he got them; if they are evil, do not be angry that you did not get
them yourself. Remember that if you want to get what is not in your power, you
cannot earn the same reward as others unless you act as they do. How is it
possible for one who does not haunt the great man's door to have equal shares
with one who does, or one who does not go in his train equality with one who
does; or one who does not praise him with one who does? You will be unjust then
and insatiable if you wish to get these privileges for nothing, without paying
their price. What is the price of a lettuce? An obol perhaps. If then a man
pays his obol and gets his lettuces, and you do not pay and do not get them, do
not think you are defrauded. For as he has the lettuces so you have the obol
you did not give. The same principle holds good too in conduct. You were not
invited to some one's entertainment? Because you did not give the host the
price for which he sells his dinner. He sells it for compliments, he sells it
for attentions. Pay him the price then, if it is to your profit. But if you
wish to get the one and yet not give up the other, nothing can satisfy you in
your folly.

What! you say, you have nothing instead of the dinner?

Nay, you have this, you have not praised the man you did not want to praise,
you have not had to bear with the insults of his doorstep.

## 26

It is in our power to discover the will of Nature from those matters on which
we have no difference of opinion. For instance, when another man's slave has
broken the wine-cup we are very ready to say at once, 'Such things must
happen'. Know then that when your own cup is broken, you ought to behave in the
same way as when your neighbour's was broken. Apply the same principle to
higher matters. Is another's child or wife dead? Not one of us but would say,
'Such is the lot of man'; but when one's own dies, straightway one cries,
'Alas! miserable am I'. But we ought to remember what our feelings are when we
hear it of another.

## 27

As a mark is not set up for men to miss it, so there is nothing intrinsically
evil in the world.

## 28

If any one trusted your body to the first man he met, you would be indignant,
but yet you trust your mind to the chance corner, and allow it to be disturbed
and confounded if he revile you; are you not ashamed to do so?

## 29

In everything you do consider what comes first and what follows, and so
approach it. Otherwise you will come to it with a good heart at first because
you have not reflected on any of the consequences, and afterwards, when
difficulties have appeared, you will desist to your shame. Do you wish to win
at Olympia? So do I, by the gods, for it is a fine thing. But consider the
first steps to it, and the consequences, and so lay your hand to the work. You
must submit to discipline, eat to order, touch no sweets, train under
compulsion, at a fixed hour, in heat and cold, drink no cold water, nor wine,
except by order; you must hand yourself over completely to your trainer as you
would to a physician, and then when the contest comes you must risk getting
hacked, and sometimes dislocate your hand, twist your ankle, swallow plenty of
sand, sometimes get a flogging, and with all this suffer defeat. When you have
considered all this well, then enter on the athlete's course, if you still wish
it. If you act without thought you will be behaving like children, who one day
play at wrestlers, another day at gladiators, now sound the trumpet, and next
strut the stage. Like them you will be now an athlete, now a gladiator, then
orator, then philosopher, but nothing with all your soul. Like an ape, you
imitate every sight you see, and one thing after another takes your fancy. When
you undertake a thing you do it casually and halfheartedly, instead of
considering it and looking at it all round. In the same way some people, when
they see a philosopher and hear a man speaking like Euphrates (and indeed who
can speak as he can? ), wish to be philosophers themselves.

Man, consider first what it is you are undertaking; then look at your own
powers and see if you can bear it. Do you want to compete in the pentathlon or
in wrestling? Look to your arms, your thighs, see what your loins are like. For
different men are born for different tasks. Do you suppose that if you do this
you can live as you do now—eat and drink as you do now, indulge desire and
discontent just as before? Nay, you must sit up late, work hard, abandon your
own people, be looked down on by a mere slave, be ridiculed by those who meet
you, get the worst of it in everything—in honour, in office, in justice, in
every possible thing. This is what you have to consider: whether you are
willing to pay this price for peace of mind, freedom, tranquillity. If not, do
not come near; do not be, like the children, first a philosopher, then a
tax-collector, then an orator, then one of Caesar's procurators. These callings
do not agree. You must be one man, good or bad; you must develop either your
Governing Principle, or your outward endowments; you must study either your
inner man, or outward things—in a word, you must choose between the position of
a philosopher and that of a mere outsider.

## 30

Appropriate acts are in general measured by the relations they are concerned
with. 'He is your father.' This means you are called on to take care of him,
give way to him in all things, bear with him if he reviles or strikes you.

'But he is a bad father.'

Well, have you any natural claim to a good father? No, only to a father.

'My brother wrongs me.'

Be careful then to maintain the relation you hold to him, and do not consider
what he does, but what you must do if your purpose is to keep in accord with
nature. For no one shall harm you, without your consent; you will only be
harmed, when you think you are harmed. You will only discover what is proper to
expect from neighbour, citizen, or praetor, if you get into the habit of
looking at the relations implied by each.

## 31

For piety towards the gods know that the most important thing is this: to have
right opinions about them—that they exist, and that they govern the universe
well and justly—and to have set yourself to obey them, and to give way to all
that happens, following events with a free will, in the belief that they are
fulfilled by the highest mind. For thus you will never blame the gods, nor
accuse them of neglecting you. But this you cannot achieve, unless you apply
your conception of good and evil to those things only which are in our power,
and not to those which are out of our power. For if you apply your notion of
good or evil to the latter, then, as soon as you fail to get what you will to
get or fail to avoid what you will to avoid, you will be bound to blame and
hate those you hold responsible. For every living creature has a natural
tendency to avoid and shun what seems harmful and all that causes it, and to
pursue and admire what is helpful and all that causes it. It is not possible
then for one who thinks he is harmed to take pleasure in what he thinks is the
author of the harm, any more than to take pleasure in the harm itself. That is
why a father is reviled by his son, when he does not give his son a share of
what the son regards as good things; thus Polynices and Eteocles were set at
enmity with one another by thinking that a king's throne was a good thing. That
is why the farmer, and the sailor, and the merchant, and those who lose wife or
children revile the gods. For men's religion is bound up with their interest.
Therefore he who makes it his concern rightly to direct his will to get and his
will to avoid, is thereby making piety his concern. But it is proper on each
occasion to make libation and sacrifice and to offer first-fruits according to
the custom of our fathers, with purity and not in slovenly or careless fashion,
without meanness and without extravagance.

## 32

When you make use of prophecy remember that while you know not what the issue
will be, but are come to learn it from the prophet, you do know before you come
what manner of thing it is, if you are really a philosopher. For if the event
is not in our control, it cannot be either good or evil. Therefore do not bring
with you to the prophet the will to get or the will to avoid, and do not
approach him with trembling, but with your mind made up, that the whole issue
is indifferent and does not affect you and that, whatever it be, it will be in
your power to make good use of it, and no one shall hinder this. With
confidence then approach the gods as counsellors, and further, when the counsel
is given you, remember whose counsel it is, and whom you will be disregarding
if you disobey. And consult the oracle, as Socrates thought men should, only
when the whole question turns upon the issue of events, and neither reason nor
any art of man provides opportunities for discovering what lies before you.
Therefore, when it is your duty to risk your life with friend or country, do
not ask the oracle whether you should risk your life. For if the prophet warns
you that the sacrifice is unfavourable, though it is plain that this means
death or exile or injury to some part of your body, yet reason requires that
even at this cost you must stand by your friend and share your country's
danger. Wherefore pay heed to the greater prophet, Pythian Apollo, who cast out
of his temple the man who did not help his friend when he was being killed.

## 33

Lay down for yourself from the first a definite stamp and style of conduct,
which you will maintain when you are alone and also in the society of men. Be
silent for the most part, or, if you speak, say only what is necessary and in a
few words. Talk, but rarely, if occasion calls you, but do not talk of ordinary
things—of gladiators, or horse-races, or athletes, or of meats or drinks—these
are topics that arise everywhere—but above all do not talk about men in blame
or compliment or comparison. If you can, turn the conversation of your company
by your talk to some fitting subject; but if you shouldgravity and dignity and
do not make yourself offensive. When you are going to meet any one, and
particularly some man of reputed eminence, set before your mind the thought,
'What would Socrates or Zeno have done?' and you will not fail to make proper
use of the occasion.

When you go to visit some great man, prepare your mind by thinking that you
will not find him in, that you will be shut out, that the doors will be slammed
in your face, that he will pay no heed to you. And if in spite of all this you
find it fitting for you to go, go and bear what happens and never say to
yourself, 'It was not worth all this'; for that shows a vulgar mind and one at
odds with outward things.

In your conversation avoid frequent and disproportionate mention of your own
doings or adventures; for other people do not take the same pleasure in hearing
what has happened to you as you take in recounting your adventures.

Avoid raising men's laughter; for it is a habit that easily slips into
vulgarity, and it may well suffice to lessen your neighbour's respect.

It is dangerous too to lapse into foul language; when anything of the kind
occurs, rebuke the offender, if the occasion allow, and if not, make it plain
to him by your silence, or a blush or a frown, that you are angry at his words.

## 34

When you imagine some pleasure, beware that it does not carry you away, like
other imaginations. Wait a while, and give yourself pause. Next remember two
things: how long you will enjoy the pleasure, and also how long you will
afterwards repent and revile yourself. And set on the other side the joy and
self-satisfaction you will feel if you refrain. And if the moment seems come to
realize it, take heed that you be not overcome by the winning sweetness and
attraction of it; set in the other scale the thought how much better is the
consciousness of having vanquished it.

## 35

When you do a thing because you have determined that it ought to be done, never
avoid being seen doing it, even if the opinion of the multitude is going to
condemn you. For if your action is wrong, then avoid doing it altogether, but
if it is right, why do you fear those who will rebuke you wrongly?

## 36

The phrases, 'It is day' and 'It is night', mean a great deal if taken
separately, but have no meaning if combined. In the same way, to choose the
larger portion at a banquet may be worth while for your body, but if you want
to maintain social decencies it is worthless. Therefore, when you are at meat
with another, remember not only to consider the value of what is set before you
for the body, but also to maintain your self-respect before your host.

## 37

If you try to act a part beyond your powers, you not only disgrace yourself in
it, but you neglect the part which you could have filled with success.

## 38

As in walking you take care not to tread on a nail or to twist your foot, so
take care that you do not harm your Governing Principle. And if we guard this
in everything we do, we shall set to work more securely.

## 39

Every man's body is a measure for his property, as the foot is the measure for
his shoe. If you stick to this limit, you will keep the right measure; if you
go beyond it, you are bound to be carried away down a precipice in the end;
just as with the shoe, if you once go beyond the foot, your shoe puts on
gilding, and soon purple and embroidery. For when once you go beyond the
measure there is no limit.

## 40

Women from fourteen years upwards are called 'madam' by men. Wherefore, when
they see that the only advantage they have got is to be marriageable, they
begin to make themselves smart and to set all their hopes on this. We must take
pains then to make them understand that they are really honoured for nothing
but a modest and decorous life.

## 41

It is a sign of a dull mind to dwell upon the cares of the body, to prolong
exercise, eating, drinking, and other bodily functions. These things are to be
done by the way; all your attention must be given to the mind.

## 42

When a man speaks evil or does evil to you, remember that he does or says it
because he thinks it is fitting for him. It is not possible for him to follow
what seems good to you, but only what seems good to him, so that, if his
opinion is wrong, he suffers, in that he is the victim of deception. In the
same way, if a composite judgement which is true is thought to be false, it is
not the judgement that suffers, but the man who is deluded about it. If you act
on this principle you will be gentle to him who reviles you, saying to yourself
on each occasion, 'He thought it right.'

## 43

Everything has two handles, one by which you can carry it, the other by which
you cannot. If your brother wrongs you, do not take it by that handle, the
handle of his wrong, for you cannot carry it by that, but rather by the other
handle—that he is a brother, brought up with you, and then you will take it by
the handle that you can carry by.

## 44

It is illogical to reason thus, 'I am richer than you, therefore I am superior
to you', 'I am more eloquent than you, therefore I am superior to you.' It is
more logical to reason, 'I am richer than you, therefore my property is
superior to yours', 'I am more eloquent than you, therefore my speech is
superior to yours.' You are something more than property or speech.

## 45

If a man wash quickly, do not say that he washes badly, but that he washes
quickly. If a man drink much wine, do not say that he drinks badly, but that he
drinks much. For till you have decided what judgement prompts him, how do you
know that he acts badly? If you do as I say, you will assent to your
apprehensive impressions and to none other.

## 46

On no occasion call yourself a philosopher, nor talk at large of your
principles among the multitude, but act on your principles. For instance, at a
banquet do not say how one ought to eat, but eat as you ought.  Remember that
Socrates had so completely got rid of the thought of display that when men came
and wanted an introduction to philosophers he took them to be introduced; so
patient of neglect was he. And if a discussion arise among the multitude on
some principle, keep silent for the most part; for you are in great danger of
blurting out some undigested thought. And when some one says to you, 'You know
nothing', and you do not let it provoke you, then know that you are really on
the right road. For sheep do not bring grass to their shepherds and show them
how much they have eaten, but they digest their fodder and then produce it in
the form of wool and milk.  Do the same yourself; instead of displaying your
principles to the multitude, show them the results of the principles you have
digested.

## 47

When you have adopted the simple life, do not pride yourself upon it, and if
you are a water-drinker do not say on every occasion, 'I am a water-drinker.'
And if you ever want to train laboriously, keep it to yourself and do not make
a show of it. Do not embrace statues. If you are very thirsty take a good
draught of cold water, and rinse you mouth and tell no one.

## 48

The ignorant man's position and character is this: he never looks to himself
for benefit or harm, but to the world outside him. The philosopher's position
and character is that he always look to himself for benefit and harm.

The signs of one who is making progress are: he blames none, praises none,
complains of none, accuses none, never speaks of himself as if he were
somebody, or as if he knew anything. And if any one compliments him he laughs
in himself at his compliment; and if one blames him, he makes no defence. He
goes about like a convalescent, careful not to disturb his constitution on its
road to recovery, until it has got firm hold. He has got rid of the will to
get, and his will to avoid is directed no longer to what is beyond our power
but only to what is in our power and contrary to nature. In all things he
exercises his will without strain. If men regard him as foolish or ignorant he
pays no heed. In one word, he keeps watch and guard on himself as his own
enemy, lying in wait for him.

## 49

When a man prides himself on being able to understand and interpret the books
of Chrysippus, say to yourself, 'If Chrysippus had not written obscurely this
man would have had nothing on which to pride himself.'

What is my object? To understand Nature and follow her. I look then for some
one who interprets her, and having heard that Chrysippus does

I come to him. But I do not understand his writings, so I seek an interpreter.
So far there is nothing to be proud of. But when I have found the interpreter
it remains for me to act on his precepts; that and that alone is a thing to be
proud of. But if I admire the mere power of exposition, it comes to this—that I
am turned into a grammarian instead of a philosopher, except that I interpret
Chrysippus in place of Homer.  Therefore, when some one says to me, 'Read me
Chrysippus', when I cannot point to actions which are in harmony and
correspondence with his teaching, I am rather inclined to blush.

## 50

Whatever principles you put before you, hold fast to them as laws which it will
be impious to transgress. But pay no heed to what any one says of you; for this
is something beyond your own control.

## 51

How long will you wait to think yourself worthy of the highest and transgress
in nothing the clear pronouncement of reason? You have received the precepts
which you ought to accept, and you have accepted them. Why then do you still
wait for a master, that you may delay the amendment of yourself till he comes?
You are a youth no longer, you are now a full-grown man. If now you are
careless and indolent and are always putting off, fixing one day after another
as the limit when you mean to begin attending to yourself, then, living or
dying, you will make no progress but will continue unawares in ignorance.
Therefore make up your mind before it is too late to live as one who is mature
and proficient, and let all that seems best to you be a law that you cannot
transgress. And if you encounter anything troublesome or pleasant or glorious
or inglorious, remember that the hour of struggle is come, the Olympic contest
is here and you may put off no longer, and that one day and one action
determines whether the progress you have achieved is lost or maintained.

This was how Socrates attained perfection, paying heed to nothing but reason,
in all that he encountered. And if you are not yet Socrates, yet ought you to
live as one who would wish to be a Socrates.

## 52

The first and most necessary department of philosophy deals with the
application of principles; for instance, 'not to lie'. The second deals with
demonstrations; for instance, 'How comes it that one ought not to lie?' The
third is concerned with establishing and analysing these processes; for
instance, 'How comes it that this is a demonstration? What is demonstration,
what is consequence, what is contradiction, what is true, what is false?' It
follows then that the third department is necessary because of the second, and
the second because of the first. The first is the most necessary part, and that
in which we must rest. But we reverse the order: we occupy ourselves with the
third, and make that our whole concern, and the first we completely neglect.
Wherefore we lie, but are ready enough with the demonstration that lying is
wrong.

## 53

On every occasion we must have these thoughts at hand,

'Lead me, O Zeus, and lead me, Destiny,  
Whither ordained is by your decree.  
I'll follow, doubting not, or if with will  
Recreant I falter, I shall follow still.'

*[Cleanthes]*

'Who rightly with necessity complies  
In things divine we count him skilled and wise.'

*[Euripides, Fragment 965]*

'Well, Crito, if this be the gods’ will, so be it.'

*[Plato, Crito, 43d]*

'Anytus and Meletus have power to put me to death, but not to harm me,'

*[Plato, Apology, 30c]*
