---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 24
---

Let not these thoughts afflict you, I shall live unhonored and be nobody
nowhere. For if want of honor is an evil, you cannot be in evil through the
means (fault) of another any more than you can be involved in anything base. Is
it then your business to obtain the rank of a magistrate, or to be received at
a banquet? By no means. How then can this be want of honor (dishonor)? And how
will you be nobody nowhere, when you ought to be somebody in those things only
which are in your power, in which indeed it is permitted to you to be a man of
the greatest worth? But your friends will be without assistance! What do you
mean by being without assistance? They will not receive money from you, nor
will you make them Roman citizens. Who then told you that these are among the
things which are in our power, and not in the power of others? And who can give
to another what he has not himself? Acquire money then, your friends say, that
we also may have something. If I can acquire money and also keep myself modest,
and faithful and magnanimous, point out the way, and I will acquire it. But if
you ask me to lose the things which are good and my own, in order that you may
gain the things which are not good, see how unfair and silly you are. Besides,
which would you rather have, money or a faithful and modest friend? For this
end, then, rather help me to be such a man, and do not ask me to do this by
which I shall lose that character. But my country, you say, as far as it
depends on me, will be without my help. I ask again, what help do you mean? It
will not have porticoes or baths through you. And what does this mean? For it
is not furnished with shoes by means of a smith, nor with arms by means of a
shoemaker. But it is enough if every man fully discharges the work that is his
own: and if you provided it with another citizen faithful and modest, would you
not be useful to it? Yes. Then you also cannot be useless to it. What place,
then, you say, shall I hold in the city? Whatever you can, if you maintain at
the same time your fidelity and modesty. But if when you wish to be useful to
the state, you shall lose these qualities, what profit could you be to it, if
you were made shameless and faithless?


