---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 25
---

Has any man been preferred before you at a banquet, or in being saluted, or in
being invited to a consultation? If these things are good, you ought to rejoice
that he has obtained them: but if bad, be not grieved because you have not
obtained them; and remember that you cannot, if you do not the same things in
order to obtain what is not in our power, be considered worthy of the same
(equal) things. For how can a man obtain an equal share with another when he
does not visit a man's doors as that other man does, when he does not attend
him when he goes abroad, as the other man does; when he does not praise
(flatter) him as another does? You will be unjust, then, and insatiable, if you
do not part with the price, in return for which those things are sold, and if
you wish to obtain them for nothing. Well, what is the price of lettuces?  An
obolus perhaps. If, then, a man gives up the obolus, and receives the
lettuces, and if you do not give up the obolus and do not obtain the lettuces,
do not suppose that you receive less than he who has got the lettuces; for as
he has the lettuces, so you have the obolus which you did not give. In the same
way, then, in the other matter also you have not been invited to a man's feast,
for you did not give to the host the price at which the supper is sold; but he
sells it for praise (flattery), he sells it for personal attention. Give then
the price, if it is for your interest, for which it is sold. But if you wish
both not to give the price and to obtain the things, you are insatiable and
silly. Have you nothing then in place of the supper? You have indeed, you have
the not flattering of him, whom you did not choose to flatter; you have the not
enduring of the man when he enters the room.


