---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 32
---

When you have recourse to divination, remember that you do not know how it will
turn out, but that you are come to inquire from the diviner. But of what kind
it is, you know when you come, if indeed you are a philosopher. For if it is
any of the things which are not in our power, it is absolutely necessary that
it must be neither good nor bad. Do not then bring to the diviner desire or
aversion: if you do, you will approach him with fear. But having determined in
your mind that everything which shall turn out (result) is indifferent, and
does not concern you, and whatever it may be, for it will be in your power to
use it well, and no man will hinder this, come then with confidence to the gods
as your advisers. And then, when any advice shall have been given, remember
whom you have taken as advisers, and whom you will have neglected, if you do
not obey them. And go to divination, as Socrates said that you ought, about
those matters in which all the inquiry has reference to the result, and in
which means are not given either by reason nor by any other art for knowing the
thing which is the subject of the inquiry. Wherefore, when we ought to share a
friend's danger or that of our country, you must not consult the diviner
whether you ought to share it. For even if the diviner shall tell you that the
signs of the victims are unlucky, it is plain that this is a token of death or
mutilation of part of the body or of exile. But reason prevails that even with
these risks we should share the dangers of our friend and of our country.
Therefore attend to the greater diviner, the Pythian god, who ejected from the
temple him who did not assist his friend when he was being murdered.


