---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Rolleston  
Date:       1881  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/rolleston.htm
Code:       twr  
Chapter: 24
---

Never afflict yourself with such reflections as I shall live without honor and
never be anybody  anywhere. For if to live without hon our be really a
misfortune, know that it is not possible for you to fall into misfortune, any
more than into vice, through anything that another can do. Is it then of your
own doing that you are appointed to the magistracy or invited to feasts? By no
means, How then is this to be without hon our? and how do you say that you
shall never be anybody, whose part it is to be somebody in those things only
which depend upon yourself, and in which it is in your power to be of the
highest worth?

But then I can be of no service to my friends. How say you? of no service?
Certainly they shall not have money from you, nor will you be able to get them
made Roman citizens. But who told you that these things were of those that
depend upon ourselves, and were not alien to us? And who is able to give that
which be himself has not?

Acquire then, they say, in order that we may possess, Well, if I am able to
acquire, without a loss of modesty, or faith, or high-mindedness, show me the
way, and I will do it. But if you require me to sacrifice that which I have,
which is really good, in order that you may compass what is no good at all,
behold how unjust and inconsiderate you are! And is it not better than money,
to have faith and modesty in a friend? Then rather help me on my way, and take
part with me, than require me to do anything which would compel me to renounce
these things.

But, you say, *I shall not be bearing my part in the service of my country!*
Again, what do you take service to consist in? Your country will not be
enriched through you with porticos and public baths. And what then? The smith
does not supply her with shoes, nor the shoemaker with weapons, but it is
enough that every man fulfil his own work, And if you have made one faithful
and modest citizen for her, are you then of no service? Wherefore neither shall
you be useless to your country.

*What place then, you say, shall I hold in the State?* Whatever place you are
able to hold, guarding still your modesty and faith. But if you cast away these
things in order to be of service to the State, of what service do you think you
will be to her then, when you are perfected in the contrary qualities?


