---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 1
---

Of all existing things some are in our power, and others are not in our power.
In our power are thought, impulse, will to get and will to avoid, and, in a
word, everything which is our own doing. Things not in our power include the
body, property, reputation, office, and, in a word, everything which is not our
own doing. Things in our power are by nature free, unhindered, untrammelled;
things not in our power are weak, servile, subject to hindrance, dependent on
others. Remember then that if you imagine that what is naturally slavish is
free, and what is naturally another's is your own, you will be hampered, you
will mourn, you will be put to confusion, you will blame gods and men; but if
you think that only your own belongs to you, and that what is another's is
indeed another's, no one will ever put compulsion or hindrance on you, you will
blame none, you will accuse none, you will do nothing against your will, no one
will harm you, you will have no enemy, for no harm can touch you.

Aiming then at these high matters, you must remember that to attain them
requires more than ordinary effort; you will have to give up some things
entirely, and put off others for the moment. And if you would have these
also—office and wealth—it may be that you will fail to get them, just because
your desire is set on the former, and you will certainly fail to attain those
things which alone bring freedom and happiness.

Make it your study then to confront every harsh impression with the words, 'You
are but an impression, and not at all what you seem to be'. Then test it by
those rules that you possess; and first by this—the chief test of all—'Is it
concerned with what is in our power or with what is not in our power?' And if
it is concerned with what is not in our power, be ready with the answer that it
is nothing to you.


