---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 29
---
##  29

In everything you do consider what comes first and what follows, and so
approach it. Otherwise you will come to it with a good heart at first because
you have not reflected on any of the consequences, and afterwards, when
difficulties have appeared, you will desist to your shame. Do you wish to win
at Olympia? So do I, by the gods, for it is a fine thing. But consider the
first steps to it, and the consequences, and so lay your hand to the work. You
must submit to discipline, eat to order, touch no sweets, train under
compulsion, at a fixed hour, in heat and cold, drink no cold water, nor wine,
except by order; you must hand yourself over completely to your trainer as you
would to a physician, and then when the contest comes you must risk getting
hacked, and sometimes dislocate your hand, twist your ankle, swallow plenty of
sand, sometimes get a flogging, and with all this suffer defeat. When you have
considered all this well, then enter on the athlete's course, if you still wish
it. If you act without thought you will be behaving like children, who one day
play at wrestlers, another day at gladiators, now sound the trumpet, and next
strut the stage. Like them you will be now an athlete, now a gladiator, then
orator, then philosopher, but nothing with all your soul. Like an ape, you
imitate every sight you see, and one thing after another takes your fancy. When
you undertake a thing you do it casually and halfheartedly, instead of
considering it and looking at it all round. In the same way some people, when
they see a philosopher and hear a man speaking like Euphrates (and indeed who
can speak as he can? ), wish to be philosophers themselves.

Man, consider first what it is you are undertaking; then look at your own
powers and see if you can bear it. Do you want to compete in the pentathlon or
in wrestling? Look to your arms, your thighs, see what your loins are like. For
different men are born for different tasks. Do you suppose that if you do this
you can live as you do now—eat and drink as you do now, indulge desire and
discontent just as before? Nay, you must sit up late, work hard, abandon your
own people, be looked down on by a mere slave, be ridiculed by those who meet
you, get the worst of it in everything—in honour, in office, in justice, in
every possible thing. This is what you have to consider: whether you are
willing to pay this price for peace of mind, freedom, tranquillity. If not, do
not come near; do not be, like the children, first a philosopher, then a
tax-collector, then an orator, then one of Caesar's procurators. These callings
do not agree. You must be one man, good or bad; you must develop either your
Governing Principle, or your outward endowments; you must study either your
inner man, or outward things—in a word, you must choose between the position of
a philosopher and that of a mere outsider.


