---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 31
---
##  31

For piety towards the gods know that the most important thing is this: to have
right opinions about them—that they exist, and that they govern the universe
well and justly—and to have set yourself to obey them, and to give way to all
that happens, following events with a free will, in the belief that they are
fulfilled by the highest mind. For thus you will never blame the gods, nor
accuse them of neglecting you. But this you cannot achieve, unless you apply
your conception of good and evil to those things only which are in our power,
and not to those which are out of our power. For if you apply your notion of
good or evil to the latter, then, as soon as you fail to get what you will to
get or fail to avoid what you will to avoid, you will be bound to blame and
hate those you hold responsible. For every living creature has a natural
tendency to avoid and shun what seems harmful and all that causes it, and to
pursue and admire what is helpful and all that causes it. It is not possible
then for one who thinks he is harmed to take pleasure in what he thinks is the
author of the harm, any more than to take pleasure in the harm itself. That is
why a father is reviled by his son, when he does not give his son a share of
what the son regards as good things; thus Polynices and Eteocles were set at
enmity with one another by thinking that a king's throne was a good thing. That
is why the farmer, and the sailor, and the merchant, and those who lose wife or
children revile the gods. For men's religion is bound up with their interest.
Therefore he who makes it his concern rightly to direct his will to get and his
will to avoid, is thereby making piety his concern. But it is proper on each
occasion to make libation and sacrifice and to offer first-fruits according to
the custom of our fathers, with purity and not in slovenly or careless fashion,
without meanness and without extravagance.


