---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      The Enchiridion  
Translator: P.E. Matheson
Date:       1916  
Source:
   label: letsreadgreek.com
   url: http://www.letsreadgreek.com/epictetus/mattheson.htm
Code:       pem  
Chapter: 33
---
##  33

Lay down for yourself from the first a definite stamp and style of conduct,
which you will maintain when you are alone and also in the society of men. Be
silent for the most part, or, if you speak, say only what is necessary and in a
few words. Talk, but rarely, if occasion calls you, but do not talk of ordinary
things—of gladiators, or horse-races, or athletes, or of meats or drinks—these
are topics that arise everywhere—but above all do not talk about men in blame
or compliment or comparison. If you can, turn the conversation of your company
by your talk to some fitting subject; but if you shouldgravity and dignity and
do not make yourself offensive. When you are going to meet any one, and
particularly some man of reputed eminence, set before your mind the thought,
'What would Socrates or Zeno have done?' and you will not fail to make proper
use of the occasion.

When you go to visit some great man, prepare your mind by thinking that you
will not find him in, that you will be shut out, that the doors will be slammed
in your face, that he will pay no heed to you. And if in spite of all this you
find it fitting for you to go, go and bear what happens and never say to
yourself, 'It was not worth all this'; for that shows a vulgar mind and one at
odds with outward things.

In your conversation avoid frequent and disproportionate mention of your own
doings or adventures; for other people do not take the same pleasure in hearing
what has happened to you as you take in recounting your adventures.

Avoid raising men's laughter; for it is a habit that easily slips into
vulgarity, and it may well suffice to lessen your neighbour's respect.

It is dangerous too to lapse into foul language; when anything of the kind
occurs, rebuke the offender, if the occasion allow, and if not, make it plain
to him by your silence, or a blush or a frown, that you are angry at his words.


