---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 1
---

Of things some are in our power, and others are not. In our power are opinion,
movement toward a thing, desire, aversion (turning from a thing); and in a
word, whatever are our own acts: not in our power are the body, property,
reputation, offices (magisterial power), and in a word, what­ever are not our
own acts. And the things in our power are by nature free, not subject to
restraint nor hindrance: but the things not in our power are weak, slavish,
subject to restraint, in the power of others. Remember then that if you think
the things which are by nature slavish to be free, and the things which are in
the power of others to be your own, you will be hindered, you will lament, you
will be disturbed, you will blame both gods and men: but if you think that only
which is your own to be your own, and if you think that what is another's, as
it really is, belongs to another, no man will ever compel you, no man will
hinder you, you will never blame any man, you will accuse no man, you will do
nothing involuntarily (against your will), no man will harm you, you will have
no enemy, for you will not suffer any harm.

If then you desire (aim at) such great things, remember that you must not
(attempt to) lay hold of them with a small effort; but you must leave alone
some things entirely, and postpone others for the present. But if you wish for
these things also (such great things), and power (office) and wealth, perhaps
you will not gain even these very things (power and wealth) because you aim
also at those former things (such great things): certainly you will fail in
those things through which alone happiness and freedom are secured.
Straightway, then, practice saying to every harsh appearance, You are an
appearance, and in no manner what you appear to be. Then examine it by the
rules which you possess, and by this first and chiefly, whether it relates to
the things which are in our power or to the things which are not in our power:
and if it relates to anything which is not in our power, be ready to say, that
it does not concern you.


