---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 29
---

In every act observe the things which come first, and those which follow it;
and so proceed to the act. If you do not, at first you will approach it with
alacrity, without having thought of the things which will follow; but
afterward, when certain base (ugly) things have shown themselves, you will be
ashamed. A man wishes to conquer at the Olympic games. I also wish indeed, for
it is a fine thing. But observe both the things which come first, and the
things which follow; and then begin the act. You must do everything according
to rule, eat according to strict orders; abstain from delicacies; exercise
yourself as you are bid at appointed times, in heat, in cold; you must not
drink cold water, nor wine as you choose. In a word, you must deliver yourself
up to the exercise master as you do to the physician, and then proceed to the
contest. And sometimes you will strain the hand, put the ankle out of joint,
swallow much dust, sometimes be flogged, and after all this be defeated. When
you have considered all this, if you still choose, go to the contest: if you do
not, you will behave like children, who at one time play at wrestlers, another
time as flute players, again as gladiators, then as trumpeters, then as tragic
actors: so you also will be at one time an athlete, at another a gladiator,
then a rhetorician, then a philosopher, but with your whole soul you will be
nothing at all; but like an ape you imitate everything that you see, and one
thing after another pleases you. For you have not undertaken anything with
consideration, nor have you surveyed it well; but carelessly and with cold
desire.

Thus some who have seen a philosopher and having heard one speak, as Euphrates
speaks—and who can speak as he does?  They wish to be philosophers themselves
also.

My man, first of all consider what kind of thing it is: and then examine your
own nature, if you are able to sustain the character. Do you wish to be a
pentathlete or a wrestler? Look at your arms, your thighs, examine your loins.
For different men are formed by nature for different things. Do you think that
if you do these things, you can eat in the same manner, drink in the same
manner, and in the same manner loathe certain things? You must pass sleepless
nights; endure toil; go away from your kinsmen; be despised by a slave; in
everything have the inferior part, in honor, in office, in the courts of
justice, in every little matter. Consider these things, if you would exchange
for them, freedom from passions, liberty, tranquility. If not, take care that,
like little children, you be not now a philosopher, then a servant of the
publicani, then a rhetorician, then a procurator (manager) for Caesar. These
things are not consistent. You must be one man, either good or bad. You must
either cultivate your own ruling faculty, or external things; you must either
exercise your skill on internal things or on external things; that is, you must
either maintain the position of a philosopher or that of a common person.


