---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 31
---

As to piety toward the gods you must know that this is the chief thing, to have
right opinions about them, to think that they exist, and that they administer
the All wellll you accuse them of neglecting
you. And it is not possible for this to be done in any other way than by
withdrawing from the things which are not in our power, and by placing the good
and the evil only in those things which are in our power. For if you think that
any of the things which are not in our power is good or bad, it is absolutely
necessary that, when you do not obtain what you wish, and when you fall into
those things which you do not wish, you will find fault and hate those who are
the cause of them; for every animal is formed by nature to this, to fly from
and to turn from the things which appear harmful and the things which are the
cause of the harm, but to follow and admire the things which are useful and the
causes of the useful.

It is impossible, then, for a person who thinks that he is harmed to be
delighted with that which he thinks to be the cause of the harm, as it is also
impossible to be pleased with the harm itself. For this reason also a father is
reviled by his son, when he gives no part to his son of the things which are
considered to be good: and it was this which made Polynices and Eteocles
enemies, the opinion that royal power was a good. It is for this reason that
the cultivator of the earth reviles the gods, for this reason the sailor does,
and the merchant, and for this reason those who lose their wives and their
children. For where the useful (your interest) is, there also piety is.
Consequently, he who takes care to desire as he ought and to avoid as he ought,
at the same time also cares after piety. But to make libations and to sacrifice
and to offer first fruits according to the custom of our fathers, purely and
not meanly nor carelessly nor scantily nor above our ability, is a thing which
belongs to all to do.


