---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 33
---

Immediately prescribe some character and some form to yourself, which you shall
observe both when you are alone and when you meet with men.

And let silence be the general rule, or let only what is necessary be said, and
in few words. And rarely and when the occasion calls we shall say something;
but about none of the common subjects, nor about gladiators, nor horse-races,
nor about athletes, nor about eating or drinking, which are the usual subjects;
and especially not about men, as blaming them or praising them, or comparing
them. If then you are able, bring over by your conversation the conversation of
your associates to that which is proper; but if you should happen to be
confined to the company of strangers, be silent.

Let not your laughter be much, nor on many occasions, nor excessive.

Refuse altogether to take an oath, if it is possible: if it is not, refuse as
far as you are able.

Avoid banquets which are given by strangers and by ignorant persons. But if
ever there is occasion to join in them, let your attention be carefully fixed,
that you slip not into the manners of the vulgar (the uninstructed). For you
must know, that if your companion be impure, he also who keeps company with him
must become impure, though he should happen to be pure.

Take (apply) the things which relate to the body as far as the bare use, as
food, drink, clothing, house, and slaves: but exclude everything which is for
show or luxury.

As to pleasure with women, abstain as far as you can before marriage: but if
you do indulge in it, do it in the way which is conformable to custom. Do not,
however, be disagreeable to those who indulge in these pleasures, or reprove
them; and do not often boast that you do not indulge in them yourself.

If a man has reported to you, that a certain person speaks ill of you, do not
make any defense (answer) to what has been told you: but reply, The man did not
know the rest of my faults, for he would not have mentioned these only.

It is not necessary to go to the theaters often: but if there is ever a proper
occasion for going, do not show yourself as being a partisan of any man except
yourself, that is, desire only that to be done which is done, and for him only
to gain the prize who gains the prize; for in this way you will meet with no
hindrance But abstain entirely from shouts and laughter at any (thing or
person), or violent emotions. And when you are come away, do not talk much
about what has passed on the stage, except about that which may lead to your
own improvement. For it is plain, if you do talk much, that you admired the
spectacle (more than you ought).

Do not go to the hearing of certain persons' recitations nor visit them
readily. But if you do attend, observe gravity and sedateness, and also avoid
making yourself disagreeable.

When you are going to meet with any person, and particularly one of those who
are considered to be in a superior condition, place before yourself what
Socrates or Zeno would have done in such circumstances, and you will have no
difficulty in making a proper use of the occasion.

When you are going to any of those who are in great power, place before
yourself that you will not find the man at home, that you will be excluded,
that the door will not be opened to you, that the man will not care about you.
And if with all this it is your duty to visit him, bear what happens, and never
say to yourself that it was not worth the trouble. For this is silly, and marks
the character of a man who is offended by externals.

In company take care not to speak much and excessively about your own acts or
dangers: for as it is pleasant to you to make mention of your dangers, it is
not so pleasant to others to hear what has happened to you. Take care also not
to provoke laughter; for this is a slippery way toward vulgar habits, and is
also adapted to diminish the respect of your neighbors. It is a dangerous habit
also to approach obscene talk. When, then, anything of this kind happens, if
there is a good opportunity, rebuke the man who has proceeded to this talk: but
if there is not an opportunity, by your silence at least, and blushing and
expression of dissatisfaction by your countenance, show plainly that you are
displeased at such talk.



