---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: George Long  
Date:       1890  
Source:
   label: wikisource.org
   url: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Enchiridion
Code:       gl  
Chapter: 51
---
##  51

How long will you then still defer thinking yourself worthy of the best things,
and in no matter transgressing the distinctive reason? Have you accepted the
theorems (rules), which it was your duty to agree to, and have you agreed to
them?

What teacher, then, do you still expect that you defer to him the correction of
yourself? You are no longer a youth, but already a full-grown man. If then you
are negligent and slothful, and are continually making procrastination after
procrastination, and proposal (intention) after proposal, and fixing day after
day, after which you will attend to yourself, you will not know that you are
not making improvement, but you will continue ignorant (uninstructed) both
while you live and till you die. Immediately, then, think it right to live as a
full-grown man, and one who is making proficiency, and let everything which
appears to you to be the best be to you a law which must not be transgressed.
And if anything laborious, or pleasant or glorious or inglorious be presented
to you, remember that now is the contest, now are the Olympic games, and they
cannot be deferred; and that it depends on one defeat and one giving way that
progress is either lost or maintained. Socrates in this way becomes perfect, in
all things improving himself, attending to nothing except to reason. But you,
though you are not yet a Socrates, ought to live as one who wishes to be a
Socrates.


