---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 24
---
##  24

Let not such considerations as these distress you: "I shall live in discredit,
and be nobody anywhere." For if discredit be an evil, you can no more be
involved in evil through another, than in baseness. Is it any business of
yours, then, to get power, or to be admitted to an entertainment? By no means.
How then, after all, is this discredit? And how is it true that you will be
.nobody anywhere; when you ought to be somebody in those things only which are
within your own power, in which you may be of the greatest consequence?  "But
my friends will be unassisted." What do you mean by unassisted? They will not
have money from you; nor will you make them Roman citizens. Who told you, then,
that these are among the things within our own power, and not rather the
affairs of others? And who can give to another the things which he himself has
not?  " Well, but get them, then, that we too may have a share." If I can get
them with the preservation of my own honor and fidelity and self-respect, show
me the way, and I will get them; but if you require me to lose my own proper
good, that you may gain what is no good, consider how unreasonable and foolish
you are. Besides, which would you rather have, a sum of money, or a faithful
and honorable friend?  Rather assist me, then, to gain this character, than
require me to do those things by which I may lose it. Well, but my country, say
you, as far as depends upon me, will be unassisted. Here, again, what
assistance is this you mean? It will not have porticos nor baths of your
providing? And what signifies that? Why, neither does a smith provide it with
shoes, nor a shoemaker with arms. It is enough if every one fully performs his
own proper business.  And were you to supply it with another faithful and
honorable citizen, would not he be of use to it?  Yes. Therefore neither are
you yourself useless to it. "What place, then," say you, " shall I hold in the
state?" Whatever you can hold with the preservation of your fidelity and honor.
But if, by desiring to be useful to that, you lose these, how can you serve
your country, when you have become faithless and shameless?


