---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 25
---
##  25

Is any one preferred before you at an entertainment, or in courtesies, or in
confidential intercourse?  If these things are good, you ought to rejoice that
he.  has them; and if they are evil, do not be grieved that you have them not.
And remember that you cannot be permitted to rival others in externals, without
using the same means to obtain them. For how can he who will not haunt the door
of any man, will not attend him, will not praise him, have an equal share with
him who does these things? You are unjust, then, and unreasonable, if you are
unwilling to pay the price for which these things are sold, and would have them
for nothing. For how much are lettuces sold?  An obolus, for instance. If
another, then, paying an obolus, takes the lettuces, and you, not paying it, go
without them, do not imagine that he has gained any advantage over you. For as
he has the lettuces, so you have the obolus which you did not give. So, in the
present case, you have not been invited to such a person's entertainment,
because you have not paid him the price for which a supper is sold. It is sold
for praise; it is sold for attendance. Give him, then, the value, if it be for
your advantage. But if you would at the same time not pay the one, and yet
receive the other, you are unreasonable and foolish. Have you nothing, then, in
place of the supper? Yes, indeed you have: not to praise him whom you do not
like to praise; not to bear the insolence of his lackeys.


