---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 29
---
##  29

In every affair consider what precedes and follows, and then undertake it.
Otherwise you will begin with spirit indeed, careless of the consequences, and
when these are developed, you will shamefully desist. “I would conquer at the
Olympic games.” But consider what precedes and follows, and then, if it be for
your advantage, engage in the affair. You must conform to rules, submit to a
diet, refrain from dainties; exercise your body, whether you choose it or not,
at a stated hour, in heat and cold; you must drink no cold water, and sometimes
no wine, – in a word, you must give yourself up to your trainer as to a
physician. Then, in the combat, you may be thrown into a ditch, dislocate your
arm, turn your ankle, swallow abundance of dust, receive stripes [for
negligence], and, after all, lose the victory. When you have reckoned up all
this, if your inclination still holds, set about the combat. Otherwise, take
notice, you will behave like children who sometimes play wrestlers, sometimes
gladiators, sometimes blow a trumpet, and sometimes act a tragedy, when they
have seen and admired these shows. Thus you too will be at one time a wrestler,
at another a gladiator; now a philosopher, now an orator; but nothing in
earnest. Like an ape you mimic all you see, and one thing after another is sure
to please you, but is out of favor as soon as it becomes familiar. For you have
never entered upon anything considerately, nor after having surveyed and tested
the whole matter; but carelessly, and with a half-way zeal. Thus some, when
they have seen a philosopher, and heard a man speaking like Euphrates, – though
indeed who can speak like him? – have a mind to be philosophers too. Consider
first, man, what the matter is, and what your own nature is able to bear. If
you would be a wrestler, consider your shoulders, your back, your thighs; for
different persons are made for different things. Do you think that you can act
as you do, and be a philosopher; that you can eat, drink, be angry, be
discontented, as you are now? You must watch, you must labor, you must get the
better of certain appetites; must quit your acquaintance, be despised by your
servant, be laughed at by those you meet; come off worse than others in
everything, – in offices, in honors, before tribunals. When you have fully
considered all these things, approach, if you please; if, by parting with them,
you have a mind to purchase serenity, freedom, and tranquillity. If not, do not
come hither; do not, like children, be now a philosopher, then a publican, then
an orator, and then one of Caesar’s officers. These things are not consistent.
You must be one man either good or bad. You must cultivate either your own
Reason or else externals, apply yourself either to things within or without
you; that is, be either a philosopher, or one of the mob.


