---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 31
---

Be assured that the essence of piety towards the gods lies in this, to form
right opinions concerning them, as existing, and as governing the universe
justly and well. And fix yourself in this resolution, to obey them, and yield
to them, and willingly follow them amidst all events, as being ruled by the
most perfect wisdom. For thus you will never find fault with the gods, nor
accuse them of neglecting you.  And it is not possible for this to be effected
in any other way than by withdrawing yourself from things which are not within
our own power, and by making good or evil to consist only in those which are.
For if you suppose any other things to be either good or evil, it is inevitable
that, when you are disappointed of what you wish, or incur what you would
avoid, you should reproach and blame their authors. For ever} creature is
naturally formed to flee and abhor things that appear hurtful, and that which
causes them; and to pursue and admire those which appear beneficial, and that
which causes them. It is impracticable, then, that one who supposes himself to
be hurt should rejoice in the person who, as he thinks, hurts him; just as it
is impossible to rejoice in the hurt itself. Hence, also, a father is reviled
by his son, when he does not impart the things which seem to be good; and this
made Polynices and Eteocles mutually enemies, that empire seemed good to both.
On this account the husbandman reviles the gods; the sailor, the merchant, or
those who have lost wife or child. For where our interest is, there too is
piety directed. So that whoever is careful to regulate his desires and
aversions as he ought is thus made careful of piety likewise. But it also
becomes incumbent on every one to offer libations and sacrifices and
first-fruits, according to the customs of his country, purely, and not
heedlessly nor negligently; not avariciously, nor yet extravagantly.


