---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 32
---
##  32

When you have recourse to divination, remember that you know not what the event
will be, and you come to learn it of the diviner; but of what nature it is you
knew before coming; at least, if you are of philosophic mind. For if it is
among the things not within our own power, it can by no means be either good or
evil. Do not, therefore, bring with you to the diviner either desire or
aversion, - else you will approach him trembling, -but first clearly understand
that every event is indifferent, and nothing to *you*, of whatever sort it may
be; for it will be in your power to make a right use of it, and this no one can
hinder. Then come with confidence to the gods as your counsellors; and
afterwards, when any counsel is given you, remember what counsellors you have
assumed, and whose advice you will neglect, if you disobey. Come to divination,
as Socrates prescribed, in cases of which the whole consideration relates to
the event, and in which no opportunities are afforded by reason, or any other
art, to discover the matter in view. When, therefore, it is our duty to share
the danger of a friend or of our country, we ought not to consult the oracle as
to whether we shall share it with them or not. For though the diviner should
forewarn you that the auspices are unfavorable, this means no more than that
either death or mutilation or exile is portended. But we have reason within us;
and it directs us, even with these hazards, to stand by our friend and our
country. Attend, therefore, to the greater diviner, the Pythian God, who once
cast out of the temple him who neglected to save his friend.This refers to an
anecdote given in full by Simplicius, in his commentary on this passage, of a
man assaulted and killed, on his way to consult the oracle, while his
companion, deserting him, took refuge in the temple, till cast out by the
Deity.- H.


