---
Author:     Epictetus  
Title:      Enchiridion  
Translator: T.W. Higginson  
Date:       1865  
Source:
   label: tufts.edu
   url: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0557.tlg002.perseus-eng2:1
Code:       twh  
Chapter: 33
---

Begin by prescribing to yourself some character and demeanor, such as you may
preserve both alone and in company.

Be mostly silent; or speak merely what is needful, and in few words. We may,
however, enter sparingly into discourse sometimes, when occasion calls for it;
but let it not run on any of the common subjects, as gladiators, or
horse-races, or athletic champions, or food, or drink, -the vulgar topics of
conversation; and especially not on men, so as either to blame, or praise, or
make comparisons. If you are able, then, by your own conversation, bring over
that of your company to proper subjects; but if you happen to find yourself
among strangers, be silent.

Let not your laughter be loud, frequent, or abundant.

Avoid taking oaths, if possible, altogether; at any rate, so far as you are
able.

Avoid public and vulgar entertainments; but if ever an occasion calls you to
them, keep your attention upon the stretch, that you may not imperceptibly
slide into vulgarity. For be assured that if a person be ever so pure himself,
yet, if his companion be corrupted, he who converses with him will be corrupted
likewise.

Provide things relating to the body no farther than absolute need requires; as
meat, drink, clothing, house, retinue. But cut off everything that looks
towards show and luxury.

Before marriage, guard yourself with all your ability from unlawful intercourse
with women; yet be not uncharitable or severe to those who are led into this,
nor frequently boast that you yourself do otherwise.

If any one tells you that such a person speaks ill of you, do not make excuses
about what is said of you, but answer: "He was ignorant of my other faults,
else he would not have mentioned these alone."

It is not necessary for you to appear often at public spectacles; but if ever
there is a proper occasion for you to be there, do not appear more solicitous
for any other than for yourself; that is, wish things to be only just as they
are, and only the best man to win; for thus nothing will go against you. But
abstain entirely from acclamations and derision and violent emotions.  And when
you come away, do not discourse a great deal on what has passed, and what
contributes nothing to your own amendment. For it would appear by such
discourse that you were dazzled by the show.

Be not prompt or ready to attend private recitations; but if you do attend,
preserve your gravity and dignity, and yet avoid making yourself disagreeable.

When you are going to confer with any one, and especially with one who seems
your superior, represent to yourself how Socrates or Zeno would behave in such
a case, and you will not be at a loss to meet properly whatever may occur.

When you are going before any one in power, fancy to yourself that you may not
find him at home, that you may be shut out, that the doors may not be opened to
you, that he may not notice you.  If, with all this, it be your duty to go,
bear what happens, and never say to yourself, "It was not worth so much." For
this is vulgar, and like a man bewildered by externals.

In society, avoid a frequent and excessive mention of your own actions and
dangers.  For however agreeable it may be to yourself to allude to the risks
you have run, it is not equally agreeable to others to hear your adventures.
Avoid likewise an endeavor to excite laughter. For this may readily slide you
into vulgarity, and, besides, may be apt to lower you in the esteem of your
acquaintance. Approaches to indecent discourse are likewise dangerous.
Therefore when anything of this sort happens, use the first fit opportunity to
rebuke him who makes advances that way; or, at least, by silence and blushing
and a serious look, show yourself to be displeased by such talk.


